I would rest my cheeks tenderly against the lovely cheeks of the pillow, which, full and fresh, are like the cheeks of our childhood. 
I would strike a match to look at my watch. 
Nearly midnight. 
This is the hour when the sick man who has been obliged to go off on a journey and has had to sleep in an unfamiliar hotel, wakened by an attack, is cheered to see a ray of light under the door. 
How fortunate, it’s already morning! 
In a moment the servants will be up, he will be able to ring, someone will come to help him. 
The hope of being relieved gives him the courage to suffer. 
In fact he thought he heard footsteps; the steps approach, then recede. 
And the ray of light that was under his door has disappeared. 
It is midnight; they have just turned off the gas; the last servant has gone and he will have to suffer the whole night through without remedy.
At Combray, every day beginning in the late afternoon, long before the moment when I would have to go to bed and stay there, without sleeping, far away from my mother and grandmother, my bedroom again became the fixed and painful focus of my preoccupations. 
They had indeed hit upon the idea, to distract me on the evenings when they found me looking too unhappy, of giving me a magic lantern, which, while awaiting the dinner hour, they would set on top of my lamp; and, after the fashion of the first architects and master glaziers of the Gothic age, it replaced the opacity of the walls with impalpable iridescences, supernatural multicoloured apparitions, where legends were depicted as in a wavering, momentary stained-glass window. 
But my sadness was only increased by this, because the mere change in lighting destroyed the familiarity my bedroom had acquired for me and which, except for the torment of going to bed, had made it tolerable to me. 
Now I no longer recognized it and I was uneasy there, as in a room in some hotel or ‘chalet’ to which I had come for the first time straight from the railway train.
Moving at the jerky pace of his horse, Golo, filled with a hideous design, came out of the small triangular forest that velveted the hillside with dark green and advanced jolting towards the castle of poor Geneviève de Brabant. 
This castle was cut off along a curved line that was in fact the edge of one of the glass ovals arranged in the frame that you slipped between the grooves of the lantern. 
It was only a section of castle and it had a moor in front of it where Geneviève stood dreaming, wearing a blue belt. 
The castle and the moor were yellow, and I had not had to wait to see them to find out their colour since, before the glasses of the frame did so, the bronze sonority of the name Brabant had shown it to me clearly. 
Golo stopped for a moment to listen sadly to the patter read out loud by my great-aunt, which he seemed to understand perfectly, conforming his posture, with a meekness that did not exclude a certain majesty, to the directions of the text; then he moved off at the same jerky pace. 
And nothing could stop his slow ride. 
If the lantern was moved, I could make out Golo’s horse continuing to advance over the window curtains, swelling out with their folds, descending into their fissures. 
The body of Golo himself, in its essence as supernatural as that of his mount, accommodated every material obstacle, every hindersome object that he encountered by taking it as his skeleton and absorbing it into himself, even the doorknob he immediately adapted to and floated invincibly over with his red robe or his pale face as noble and as melancholy as ever, but revealing no disturbance at this transvertebration.
Certainly I found some charm in these brilliant projections, which seemed to emanate from a Merovingian past and send out around me such ancient reflections of history. 
But I cannot express the uneasiness caused in me by this intrusion of mystery and beauty into a room I had at last filled with my self to the point of paying no more attention to the room than to that self. 
The anaesthetizing influence of habit having ceased, I would begin to have thoughts, and feelings, and they are such sad things. 
That doorknob of my room, which differed for me from all other doorknobs in the world in that it seemed to open of its own accord, without my having to turn it, so unconscious had its handling become for me, was now serving as an astral body for Golo. 
And as soon as they rang for dinner, I hastened to run to the dining-room where the big hanging lamp, ignorant of Golo and Bluebeard, and well acquainted with my family and beef casserole, shed the same light as on every other evening; and to fall into the arms of Mama, whom Geneviève de Brabant’s misfortunes made all the dearer to me, while Golo’s crimes drove me to examine my own conscience more scrupulously.
After dinner, alas, I soon had to leave Mama, who stayed there talking with the others, in the garden if the weather was fine, in the little drawing-room to which everyone withdrew if the weather was bad. 
Everyone, except my grandmother, who felt that ‘it’s a pity to shut oneself indoors in the country’ and who had endless arguments with my father on days when it rained too heavily, because he sent me to read in my room instead of having me stay outdoors. 
‘That’s no way to make him strong and active,’ she would say sadly, ‘especially that boy, who so needs to build up his endurance and will-power.’ My father would shrug his shoulders and study the barometer, for he liked meteorology, while my mother, making no noise so as not to disturb him, watched him with a tender respect, but not so intently as to try to penetrate the mystery of his superior qualities. 
But as for my grandmother, in all weathers, even in a downpour when Françoise had rushed the precious wicker armchairs indoors for fear they would get wet, we would see her in the empty, rain-lashed garden, pushing back her disordered grey locks so that her forehead could more freely drink in the salubriousness of the wind and rain. 
She would say: ‘At last, one can breathe!’ and would roam the soaked paths – too symmetrically aligned for her liking by the new gardener, who lacked all feeling for nature and whom my father had been asking since morning if the weather would clear – with her jerky, enthusiastic little step, regulated by the various emotions excited in her soul by the intoxication of the storm, the power of good health, the stupidity of my upbringing and the symmetry of the gardens, rather than by the desire quite unknown to her to spare her plum-coloured skirt the spots of mud under which it would disappear up to a height that was for her maid always a source of despair and a problem.
For many years, even though, especially before his marriage, the younger M. Swann often came to see them at Combray, my great-aunt and my grandparents did not suspect that he had entirely ceased to live in the kind of society his family had frequented and that, under the sort of incognito which this name Swann gave him among us, they were harbouring – with the perfect innocence of honest innkeepers who have under their roof, without knowing it, some celebrated highwayman – one of the most elegant members of the Jockey Club,3 a favourite friend of the Comte de Paris4 and the Prince of Wales,5 one of the men most sought after by the high society of the Faubourg Saint-Germain.
Our ignorance of this brilliant social life that Swann led was obviously due in part to the reserve and discretion of his character, but also to the fact that bourgeois people in those days formed for themselves a rather Hindu notion of society and considered it to be made up of closed castes, in which each person, from birth, found himself placed in the station which his family occupied and from which nothing, except the accidents of an exceptional career or an unhoped-for marriage, could draw him in order to make him enter a higher caste. 
M. Swann, the father, was a stockbroker; ‘Swann the son’ would find he belonged for his entire life to a caste in which fortunes varied, as in a tax bracket, between such and such fixed incomes. 
One knew which had been his father’s associations, one therefore knew which were his own, with which people he was ‘in a position’ to consort. 
If he knew others, these were bachelor acquaintances on whom old friends of the family, as were my relatives, would close their eyes all the more benignly because he continued, after losing his parents, to come faithfully to see us; but we would have been ready to wager that these people whom he saw, who were unknown to us, were the sort he would not have dared greet had he encountered them when he was with us. 
If you were determined to assign Swann a social coefficient that was personal to him, among the other sons of stockbrokers in a position equal to that of his parents, this coefficient would have been a little lower for him because, very simple in his manner and having always had a ‘craze’ for antiques and for painting, he now lived and amassed his collections in an old townhouse which my grandmother dreamed of visiting, but which was situated on the quai d’Orléans, a part of town where my great-aunt felt it was ignominious to live. 
‘But are you a connoisseur? I ask for your own sake, because you’re likely to let the dealers unload some awful daubs on you,’ my great-aunt would say to him; in fact she did not assume he had any competence and even from an intellectual point of view had no very high opinion of a man who in conversation avoided serious subjects and showed a very prosaic preciseness not only when he gave us cooking recipes, entering into the smallest details, but even when my grandmother’s sisters talked about artistic subjects. 
Challenged by them to give his opinion, to express his admiration for a painting, he maintained an almost ungracious silence and, on the other hand, redeemed himself if he could provide about the museum in which it was to be found, about the date at which it had been painted, a material piece of information. 
But usually he would content himself with trying to entertain us by telling a new story each time about something that had just happened to him involving people selected from among those we knew, the Combray pharmacist, our cook, our coachman. 
Certainly these tales made my great-aunt laugh, but she could not distinguish clearly if this was because of the absurd role Swann always assigned himself or because of the wit he put into telling them: ‘You are quite a character, Monsieur Swann!’ Being the only rather vulgar person in our family, she took care to point out to strangers, when they were talking about Swann, that, had he wanted to, he could have lived on the boulevard Haussmann or the avenue de l’Opéra, that he was the son of M. Swann, who must have left four or five million, but that this was his whim. 
A whim that she felt moreover must be so amusing to others that in Paris, when M. Swann came on New Year’s Day to bring her her bag of marrons glacés, she never failed, if there was company, to say to him: ‘Well, Monsieur Swann! Do you still live next-door to the wine depot, so as to be sure of not missing the train when you go to Lyon?’ And she would look out of the corner of her eye, over her lorgnon, at the other visitors.
But if anyone had told my great-aunt that this Swann, who, as the son of old M. Swann, was perfectly ‘qualified’ to be received by all the ‘best of the bourgeoisie’, by the most respected notaries or lawyers of Paris (a hereditary privilege he seemed somewhat inclined to let lapse), had, as though in secret, quite a different life; that on leaving our house, in Paris, after telling us he was going home to bed, he retraced his steps as soon as he had turned the corner and went to a certain drawing-room that no eye of any broker or broker’s associate would ever contemplate, this would have seemed to my aunt as extraordinary as might to a better-educated lady the thought of being personally on close terms with Aristaeus and learning that, after having a chat with her, he would go deep into the heart of the realms of Thetis, into an empire hidden from the eyes of mortals, where Virgil shows us him being received with open arms; or – to confine oneself to an image that had more chance of occurring to her, for she had seen it painted on our petits-fours plates at Combray – of having had as a dinner guest Ali Baba, who, as soon as he knows he is alone, will enter the cave dazzling with unsuspected treasure.
One day when he had come to see us in Paris after dinner apologizing for being in evening clothes, Françoise having said, after he left, that she had learned from the coachman that he had dined ‘at the home of a princess,’ – ‘Yes, a princess of the demi-monde!’ my aunt had responded shrugging her shoulders without raising her eyes from her knitting, with serene irony.
Thus, my great-aunt was cavalier in her treatment of him. 
Since she believed he must be flattered by our invitations, she found it quite natural that he never came to see us in the summertime without having in his hand a basket of peaches or raspberries from his garden and that from each of his trips to Italy he would bring me back photographs of masterpieces.
Yet one day when my grandmother had gone to ask a favour from a lady she had known at the Sacré-Coeur7 (and with whom, because of our notion of the castes, she had not wished to remain in close contact despite a reciprocal congeniality), this lady, the Marquise de Villeparisis of the famous de Bouillon8 family, had said to her: ‘I believe you know M. Swann very well; he is a great friend of my nephew and niece the des Laumes.’ My grandmother had returned from her visit full of enthusiasm for the house, which overlooked some gardens and in which Mme de Villeparisis had advised her to rent a flat, and also for a waistcoat-maker and his daughter, who kept a shop in the courtyard into which she had gone to ask them to put a stitch in her skirt, which she had torn in the stairwell. 
My grandmother had found these people wonderful, she declared that the girl was a pearl and the waistcoat-maker was the most distinguished, the finest man she had ever seen. 
Because for her, distinction was something absolutely independent of social position. 
She went into ecstasies over an answer the waistcoat-maker had given her, saying to Mama: ‘Sévigné9 couldn’t have said it any better!’ and, in contrast, of a nephew of Mme de Villeparisis whom she had met at the house: ‘Oh, my dear daughter, how common he is!’
Now the remark about Swann had had the effect, not of raising him in my great-aunt’s mind, but of lowering Mme de Villeparisis. 
It seemed that the respect which, on my grandmother’s faith, we accorded Mme de Villeparisis created a duty on her part to do nothing that would make her less worthy, a duty in which she had failed by learning of Swann’s existence, by permitting relatives of hers to associate with him. 
‘What! She knows Swann? A person you claim is a relation of the Maréchal de MacMahon?’10 This opinion of my family’s regarding Swann’s associations seemed to them confirmed later by his marriage to a woman of the worst social station, practically a cocotte, whom, what was more, he never attempted to introduce, continuing to come to our house alone, though less and less, but from whom they believed they could judge – assuming it was there that he had found her – the social circle, unknown to them, that he habitually frequented.
But one time, my grandfather read in a newspaper that M. Swann was one of the most faithful guests at the Sunday lunches given by the Duc de X…, whose father and uncle had been the most prominent statesmen in the reign of Louis-Philippe.11 
Now my grandfather was interested in all the little facts that could help him enter imaginatively into the private lives of men like Molé, like the Duc Pasquier, like the Duc de Broglie.12 
He was delighted to learn that Swann associated with people who had known them. 
My great-aunt, however, interpreted this news in a sense unfavourable to Swann: anyone who chose his associations outside the caste into which he had been born, outside his social ‘class’, suffered in her eyes a regrettable lowering of his social position. 
It seemed to her that he gave up forthwith the fruit of all the good relations with well-placed people so honourably preserved and stored away for their children by foresightful families (my great aunt had even stopped seeing the son of a lawyer we knew because he had married royalty and was therefore in her opinion demoted from the respected rank of lawyer’s son to that of one of those adventurers, former valets or stableboys, on whom they say that queens sometimes bestowed their favours). 
She disapproved of my grandfather’s plan to question Swann, the next evening he was to come to dinner, about these friends of his we had discovered. 
At the same time my grandmother’s two sisters, old maids who shared her nobility of character, but not her sort of mind, declared that they could not understand what pleasure their brother-in-law could find in talking about such foolishness. 
They were persons of lofty aspirations, who for that very reason were incapable of taking an interest in what is known as tittle-tattle, even if it had some historic interest, and more generally in anything that was not directly connected to an aesthetic or moral object. 
The disinterestedness of their minds was such, with respect to all that, closely or distantly, seemed connected with worldly life, that their sense of hearing – having finally understood its temporary uselessness when the conversation at dinner assumed a tone that was frivolous or merely pedestrian without these two old spinsters being able to lead it back to the subjects dear to them – would suspend the functioning of its receptive organs and allow them to undergo a true beginning of atrophy. 
If my grandfather needed to attract the two sisters’ attention at such times, he had to resort to those bodily signals used by alienists with certain lunatics suffering from distraction: striking a glass repeatedly with the blade of a knife, while speaking to them sharply and looking them suddenly in the eye, violent methods which these psychiatrists often bring with them into their ordinary relations with healthy people, either from professional habit or because they believe everyone is a little crazy.
They were more interested when, the day before Swann was to come to dinner, and had personally sent them a case of Asti wine, my aunt, holding a copy of the Figaro in which next to the title of a painting in an exhibition of Corot, these words appeared: ‘From the collection of M. Charles Swann,’ said to us: ‘Did you see this? Swann is “front page news” in the Figaro. – But I’ve always told you he had a great deal of taste, said my grandmother. – Of course you would! Anything so long as your opinion is not the same as ours,’ answered my great-aunt, who, knowing that my grandmother was never of the same opinion as she, and not being quite sure that she herself was the one we always declared was right, wanted to extract from us a general condemnation of my grandmother’s convictions against which she was trying to force us into solidarity with her own. 
But we remained silent. 
When my grandmother’s sisters expressed their intention of speaking to Swann about this mention in the Figaro, my great-aunt advised them against it. 
Each time she saw in others an advantage, however small, that she did not have, she persuaded herself that it was not an advantage but a detriment and she pitied them so as not to have to envy them. 
‘I believe you would not be pleasing him at all; I am quite sure I would find it very unpleasant to see my name printed boldly like that in the newspaper, and I would not be at all gratified if someone spoke to me about it.’ But she did not persist in trying to convince my grandmother’s sisters; for they in their horror of vulgarity had made such a fine art of concealing a personal allusion beneath ingenious circumlocutions that it often went unnoticed even by the person to whom it was addressed. 
As for my mother, she thought only of trying to persuade my father to agree to talk to Swann not about his wife but about his daughter, whom he adored and because of whom it was said he had finally entered into this marriage. 
‘You might just say a word to him; just ask how she is. It must be so hard for him.’ But my father would become annoyed: ‘No, no; you have the most absurd ideas. It would be ridiculous.’
I thought that Swann would surely have laughed at the anguish I had just suffered if he had read my letter and guessed its purpose; yet, on the contrary, as I learned later, a similar anguish was the torment of long years of his life and no one, perhaps, could have understood me as well as he; in his case, the anguish that comes from the feeling that the person you love is in a place of enjoyment where you are not, where you cannot follow, came to him through love, to which it is in some sense predestined, by which it will be hoarded, appropriated; but when, as in my case, this anguish comes into us before love has made its appearance in our life, it drifts as it waits for it, indeterminate and free, without a particular assignment, at the service of one feeling one day, of another the next, sometimes of filial tenderness or affection for a friend. 
And the joy with which I served my first apprenticeship when Françoise came back to tell me my letter would be delivered Swann too had known well, that deceptive joy which some friend, some relative of the woman we love can give us when, arriving at the house or theatre where she is, for some dance, gala evening or première at which he is going to meet her, this friend sees us wandering outside, desperately waiting for some opportunity to communicate with her. 
He recognizes us, speaks to us familiarly, asks us what we are doing there. 
And when we invent the story that we have something urgent to say to his relative or friend, he assures us that nothing could be simpler, brings us into the hall and promises to send her to us in five minutes. 
How we love him, as at that moment I loved Françoise – the well-intentioned intermediary who with a single word has just made tolerable, human and almost propitious the unimaginable, infernal festivity into the thick of which we had been imagining that hostile, perverse and exquisite vortices of pleasure were carrying away from us and inspiring with derisive laughter the woman we love! 
If we are to judge by him, the relative who has come up to us and is himself also one of the initiates in the cruel mysteries, the other guests at the party cannot have anything very demoniacal about them. 
Those inaccessible and excruciating hours during which she was about to enjoy unknown pleasures – now, through an unhoped-for breach, we are entering them; now, one of the moments which, in succession, would have composed those hours, a moment as real as the others, perhaps even more important to us, because our mistress is more involved in it, we can picture to ourselves, we possess it, we are taking part in it, we have created it almost: the moment in which he will tell her we are here, downstairs. 
And no doubt the other moments of the party would not have been essentially very different from this one, would not have had anything more delectable about them that should make us suffer so, since the kind friend has said to us: ‘Why, she’ll be delighted to come down! It’ll be much nicer for her to chat with you than to be bored up there.’ Alas! 
Swann had learned by experience that the good intentions of a third person have no power over a woman who is annoyed to find herself pursued even into a party by someone she does not love. 
Often, the friend comes back down alone.
It was not so. 
My father was constantly refusing me permission for things that had been authorized in the more generous covenants granted by my mother and grandmother because he did not bother about ‘principles’ and for him there was no ‘law of nations’. 
For a completely contingent reason, or even for no reason, he would at the last minute deny me a certain walk that was so customary, so consecrated that to deprive me of it was a violation, or, as he had done once again this evening, long before the ritual hour he would say to me: ‘Go on now, up to bed, no arguments!’ But also, because he had no principles (in my grandmother’s sense), he was not properly speaking intransigent. 
He looked at me for a moment with an expression of surprise and annoyance, then as soon as Mama had explained to him in a few embarrassed words what had happened, he said to her: ‘Go along with him, then. You were just saying you didn’t feel very sleepy, stay in his room for a little while, I don’t need anything. – But my dear, answered my mother timidly, whether I’m sleepy or not doesn’t change anything, we can’t let the child get into the habit… – But it isn’t a question of habit, said my father, shrugging his shoulders, you can see the boy is upset, he seems very sad; look, we’re not brutes! You’ll end by making him ill, and that won’t do us much good! There are two beds in his room; go ahead and tell Françoise to prepare the big one for you and sleep there with him tonight. Now then, goodnight, I’m not as high-strung as the two of you, I’m going to bed.’
In fact, she could never resign herself to buying anything from which one could not derive an intellectual profit, and especially the profit which beautiful things afford us by teaching us to seek our pleasure elsewhere than in the satisfactions of material comfort and vanity. 
Even when she had to make someone a present of the kind called ‘useful’, when she had to give an armchair, silverware, a walking-stick, she looked for ‘old’ ones, as though, now that long desuetude had effaced their character of usefulness, they would appear more disposed to tell us about the life of people of other times than to serve the needs of our own life. 
She would have liked me to have in my room photographs of the most beautiful monuments or landscapes. 
But at the moment of buying them, and even though the thing represented had an aesthetic value, she found that vulgarity and utility too quickly resumed their places in that mechanical mode of representation, the photograph. 
She would try to use cunning and, if not to eliminate commercial banality entirely, at least to reduce it, to substitute for the greater part of it more art, to introduce into it in a sense several ‘layers’ of art: instead of photographs of Chartres Cathedral, the Fountains of Saint-Cloud, or Mount Vesuvius, she would make inquiries of Swann as to whether some great painter had not depicted them, and preferred to give me photographs of Chartres Cathedral by Corot,25 of the Fountains of Saint-Cloud by Hubert Robert,26 of Mount Vesuvius by Turner,27 which made one degree of art more. 
But if the photographer had been removed from the representation of the masterpiece or of nature and replaced by a great artist, he still reclaimed his rights to reproduce that very interpretation. 
Having deferred vulgarity as far as possible, my grandmother would try to move it back still farther. 
She would ask Swann if the work had not been engraved, preferring, whenever possible, old engravings that also had an interest beyond themselves, for example those that represent a masterpiece in a state in which we can no longer see it today (like the engraving by Morghen28 of Leonardo’s Last Supper before its deterioration). 
It must be said that the results of this interpretation of the art of gift-giving were not always very brilliant. 
The idea I formed of Venice from a drawing by Titian that is supposed to have the lagoon in the background was certainly far less accurate than the one I would have derived from simple photographs. 
We could no longer keep count, at home, when my great-aunt wanted to draw up an indictment against my grandmother, of the armchairs she had presented to young couples engaged to be married or old husbands and wives which, at the first attempt to make use of them, had immediately collapsed under the weight of one of the recipients. 
But my grandmother would have believed it petty to be overly concerned about the solidity of a piece of wood in which one could still distinguish a small flower, a smile, sometimes a lovely invention from the past. 
Even what might, in these pieces of furniture, answer a need, since it did so in a manner to which we are no longer accustomed, charmed her like the old ways of speaking in which we see a metaphor that is obliterated, in our modern language, by the abrasion of habit. 
Now, in fact, the pastoral novels of George Sand that she was giving me for my saint’s day were, like an old piece of furniture, full of expressions that had fallen into disuse and turned figurative again, the sort you no longer find anywhere but in the country. 
And my grandmother had bought them in preference to others just as she would have been quicker to commend an estate on which there was a Gothic dovecote or another of those old things that exercise such a happy influence on the mind by filling it with longing for impossible voyages through time.
There is a great deal of chance in all this, and a second sort of chance, that of our death, often does not let us wait very long for the favours of the first.
I find the Celtic belief very reasonable, that the souls of those we have lost are held captive in some inferior creature, in an animal, in a plant, in some inanimate thing, effectively lost to us until the day, which for many never comes, when we happen to pass close to the tree, come into possession of the object that is their prison. 
Then they quiver, they call out to us, and as soon as we have recognized them, the spell is broken. 
Delivered by us, they have overcome death and they return to live with us.
It is the same with our past. 
It is a waste of effort for us to try to summon it, all the exertions of our intelligence are useless. 
The past is hidden outside the realm of our intelligence and beyond its reach, in some material object (in the sensation that this material object would give us) which we do not suspect. 
It depends on chance whether we encounter this object before we die, or do not encounter it.
Undoubtedly what is fluttering this way deep inside me must be the image, the visual memory which is attached to this taste and is trying to follow it to me. 
But it is struggling too far away, too confusedly; I can just barely perceive the neutral glimmer in which is blended the elusive eddying of stirred-up colours; but I cannot distinguish the form, cannot ask it, as the one possible interpreter, to translate for me the evidence of its contemporary, its inseparable companion, the taste, ask it to tell me what particular circumstance is involved, what period of the past.
Will it reach the surface of my limpid consciousness – this memory, this old moment which the attraction of an identical moment has come so far to summon, to move, to raise up from my very depths? 
I don’t know. 
Now I no longer feel anything, it has stopped, gone back down perhaps; who knows if it will ever rise up from its darkness again? 
Ten times I must begin again, lean down towards it. 
And each time, the timidity that deters us from every difficult task, from every important piece of work, has counselled me to leave it, to drink my tea and think only about my worries of today, my desires for tomorrow, which may be pondered painlessly.
And suddenly the memory appeared. 
That taste was the taste of the little piece of madeleine which on Sunday mornings at Combray (because that day I did not go out before it was time for Mass), when I went to say good morning to her in her bedroom, my Aunt Léonie would give me after dipping it in her infusion of tea or lime-blossom. 
The sight of the little madeleine had not recalled anything to me before I tasted it; perhaps because I had often seen them since, without eating them, on the pastry-cooks’ shelves, and their image had therefore left those days of Combray and attached itself to others more recent; perhaps because, of these recollections abandoned so long outside my memory, nothing survived, everything had come apart; the forms – and the form, too, of the little shell made of cake, so fatly sensual within its severe and pious pleating – had been destroyed, or, still half asleep, had lost the force of expansion that would have allowed them to rejoin my consciousness. 
But, when nothing subsists of an old past, after the death of people, after the destruction of things, alone, frailer but more enduring, more immaterial, more persistent, more faithful, smell and taste still remain for a long time, like souls, remembering, waiting, hoping, on the ruin of all the rest, bearing without giving way, on their almost impalpable droplet, the immense edifice of memory.
And as soon as I had recognized the taste of the piece of madeleine dipped in lime-blossom tea that my aunt used to give me (though I did not yet know and had to put off to much later discovering why this memory made me so happy), immediately the old grey house on the street, where her bedroom was, came like a stage-set to attach itself to the little wing opening on to the garden that had been built for my parents behind it (that truncated section which was all I had seen before then); and with the house the town, from morning to night and in all weathers, the Square, where they sent me before lunch, the streets where I went to do errands, the paths we took if the weather was fine. 
And as in that game in which the Japanese amuse themselves by filling a porcelain bowl with water and steeping in it little pieces of paper until then indistinct, which, the moment they are immersed in it, stretch and shape themselves, colour and differentiate, become flowers, houses, human figures, firm and recognizable, so now all the flowers in our garden and in M. Swann’s park, and the water-lilies on the Vivonne, and the good people of the village and their little dwellings and the church and all of Combray and its surroundings, all of this which is assuming form and substance, emerged, town and gardens alike, from my cup of tea.
Combray, from far away, for ten leagues around, seen from the railroad when we arrived there the last week before Easter, was no more than a church summing up the town, representing it, speaking of it and for it into the distance, and, when one approached, holding close around its high dark cloak, in the middle of a field, against the wind, like a shepherdess her sheep, the woolly grey backs of the gathered houses, which a vestige of medieval ramparts girdled here and there with a line as perfectly circular as a small town in a primitive painting. 
To live in, Combray was a little dreary, like its streets, whose houses, built of the blackish stones of the countryside, fronted by outside steps, capped with gables that cast shadows down before them, were so dark that once the daylight began to fade one had to draw back the curtains in the ‘formal rooms’; streets with the solemn names of saints (of whom many were connected to the history of the earliest seigneurs of Combray): the rue Saint-Hilaire, the rue Saint-Jacques, in which my aunt’s house stood, the rue Sainte-Hildegarde, along which her railings ran, and the rue du Saint-Esprit, on to which opened the little side-gate of her garden; and these streets of Combray exist in a part of my memory so withdrawn, painted in colours so different from those that now coat the world for me, that in truth all of them, and also the church that rose above them on the Square, appear to me more unreal even than the projections of the magic lantern; and that at certain moments, it seems to me that to be able to cross the rue Saint-Hilaire again, to be able to take a room in the rue de l’Oiseau – at the old Hôtellerie de l’Oiseau Flesché, from whose basement windows rose a smell of cooking that now and then still rises in me as intermittently and as warmly – would be to enter into contact with the Beyond in a manner more marvellously supernatural than making the acquaintance of Golo or chatting with Genevieve de Brabant.
In the next room, I would hear my aunt talking all alone in an undertone. 
She always talked rather softly because she thought there was something broken and floating in her head that she would have displaced by speaking too loudly, but she never remained for long, even alone, without saying something, because she believed it was beneficial to her throat and that if she prevented the blood from stopping there, she would reduce the frequency of the fits of breathlessness and the spasms from which she suffered; besides, in the absolute inertia in which she lived, she attributed to the least of her sensations an extraordinary importance; she endowed them with a motility that made it difficult for her to keep them to herself, and lacking a confidant to whom she could communicate them, she announced them to herself, in a perpetual monologue that was her only form of activity. 
Unfortunately, having acquired the habit of thinking out loud, she did not always take care to see that there was no one in the next room, and I often heard her saying to herself: ‘I must be sure to remember that I did not sleep’ (for never sleeping was her great claim, and the language we all used deferred to it and was marked by it: in the morning Françoise did not come to ‘wake’ her, but ‘entered’ her room; when my aunt wanted to take a nap during the day, we said she wanted to ‘reflect’ or ‘rest’; and when she happened to forget herself, while chatting, so far as to say: ‘what woke me up’ or ‘I dreamed that’, she would blush and correct herself instantly).
After a moment I would go in and kiss her; Françoise would be steeping her tea; or, if my aunt was feeling agitated, she would ask instead for her infusion and I would be the one entrusted with pouring from the pharmacy bag on to a plate the quantity of lime-blossom which then had to be put into the boiling water. 
The drying of the stems had curved them into a whimsical trellis-work in whose interlacings the pale flowers opened, as if a painter had arranged them, had made them pose in the most ornamental way. 
The leaves, having lost or changed their aspect, looked like the most disparate things, a fly’s transparent wing, the white back of a label, a rose petal, but these things had been heaped up, crushed or woven as in the construction of a nest. 
A thousand small useless details – the charming prodigality of the pharmacist – that would have been eliminated in an artificial preparation gave me, like a book in which one is amazed to encounter the name of a person one knows, the pleasure of realizing that these were actually stems of real lime-blossoms, like those I saw in the avenue de la Gare, altered precisely because they were not duplicates but themselves, and because they had aged. 
And since here, each new characteristic was only the metamorphosis of an old characteristic, in some little grey balls I recognized the green buds that had not come to term; but especially the pink lustre, lunar and soft, that made the flowers stand out amid the fragile forest of stems where they were suspended like little gold roses – a sign, like the glow on a wall that still reveals the location of a fresco that has worn away, of the difference between the parts of the tree that had been ‘in colour’ and those that had not – showed me that these petals were in fact the same ones that, before filling the pharmacy bag with flowers, had embalmed the spring evenings. 
That candle-pink flame was their colour still, but half doused and drowsing in the diminished life that was theirs now, and that is a sort of twilight of flowers. 
Soon my aunt would be able to dip into the boiling infusion, of which she savoured the taste of dead leaf or faded flower, a small madeleine, a piece of which she would hold out to me when it had sufficiently softened.
On one side of her bed was a large yellow chest of drawers of lemon-wood and a table that was akin to both a dispensary and a high altar, on which, below a small statue of the Virgin and a bottle of Vichy-Célestins, could be found her missals and her medical prescriptions, everything needed for following from her bed both the services and her regimen, for not missing the hour either of her pepsin or of Vespers. 
On the other side, her bed lay by the window, she had the street there before her eyes and on it from morning to night, to divert her melancholy, like the Persian princes, would read the daily but immemorial chronicle of Combray, which she would afterwards commentate with Françoise.
I had not been with my aunt five minutes before she would send me away for fear that I would tire her. 
She would hold out to my lips her sad, pale, dull forehead, on which, at this morning hour, she had not yet arranged her false hair, and where the bones showed through like the points of a crown of thorns or the beads of a rosary, and she would say to me: ‘Now, my poor child, off you go, get ready for Mass; and if you see Françoise downstairs, tell her not to stay too long amusing herself with all of you, she should come up soon to see if I need anything.’
Françoise, who had been in her service for years and did not suspect at that time that one day she would enter exclusively into ours, did in fact neglect my aunt a little during the months when we were there. 
There had been a time, in my childhood, before we went to Combray, when my Aunt Léonie still spent the winters in Paris with her mother, when Françoise was such a stranger to me that on January 1, before entering my great-aunt’s, my mother would put a five-franc coin in my hand and say to me: ‘Take great care not to give it to the wrong person. Wait to give it until you hear me say, “Good morning, Françoise”; at the same time, I’ll touch you lightly on the arm.’ Hardly had we arrived in my aunt’s dim hall than we would see in the shadows, under the flutes of a dazzling bonnet as stiff and fragile as if it were made of spun sugar, the concentric ripples of an anticipatory smile of gratitude. 
It was Françoise, standing motionless in the frame of the little door of the corridor like the statue of a saint in its niche. 
When we were a little used to this chapel darkness, we could distinguish on her face the disinterested love of humanity, the fond respect for the upper classes excited in the best regions of her heart by the hope of a New Year’s gift. 
Mama pinched my arm violently and said in a loud voice: ‘Good morning, Françoise.’ At this signal, my fingers opened and I released the coin, which found a hand to receive it that was embarrassed but outstretched. 
But ever since we had begun going to Combray I knew no one better than Françoise, we were her favourites, she had for us, at least during the first years, not only as much regard as for my aunt, but also a keener liking, because we added, to the prestige of being part of the family (she had, for the invisible bonds formed between the members of a family by the circulation of the same blood, as much respect as a Greek tragedian), the charm of not being her usual masters. 
And so with what joy would she welcome us, feeling sorry for us that we did not yet have finer weather, the day of our arrival, just before Easter, when there was often an icy wind, while Mama asked her for news of her daughter and her nephews, whether her grandson was a pretty child, what they were planning to make of him, whether he was going to be like his grandmother.
And when there was no one else there, Mama, who knew that Françoise still mourned her parents, who had died years ago, would talk to her about them gently, ask her for a thousand details about what sort of life they had led.
She had guessed that Françoise did not like her son-in-law and that he spoiled the pleasure she took in being with her daughter, with whom she could not chat as freely when he was there. 
And so, when Françoise went to see them, a few leagues from Combray, Mama would say to her, smiling: ‘Isn’t it so, Françoise, if Julien is obliged to be away and you have Marguerite all to yourself all day long, you’ll be sorry, but you’ll make the best of it?’ And Françoise would say, laughing: ‘Madame knows everything; Madame is worse than those x-rays’ (she said x with an affected difficulty and a smile to poke fun at herself, an ignorant woman, for using that erudite term) ‘that they brought in for Mme Octave and that see what you have in your heart,’ and disappeared, embarrassed that someone was paying attention to her, perhaps so that we would not see her cry; Mama was the first person who gave her that sweet sensation, the feeling that her life as a country woman, her joys, her sorrows could be of some interest, could be a reason for pleasure or sadness in someone other than herself. 
My aunt was resigned to managing without her to some extent during our stay, knowing how much my mother appreciated the service of this maid who was so intelligent and active, who was as beautiful at five o’clock in the morning in her kitchen, under a bonnet whose dazzling rigid flutes appeared to be made of porcelain, as she was when going to High Mass; who did everything well, working like a horse, whether she was in good health or not, but without a fuss, as though it were nothing, the only one of my aunt’s maids who, when Mama asked for hot water or black coffee, brought them really boiling; she was one of those servants who, in a household, are at the same time those most immediately displeasing to a stranger, perhaps because they do not bother to win him over and are not attentive to him, knowing very well they have no need of him, that one would stop seeing him rather than dismiss them; and who are, on the other hand, those most valued by masters who have tested their real capacities, and do not care about the superficial charm, the servile chatter that makes a favourable impression on a visitor, but that often cloaks an ineducable incompetence.
When Françoise, having seen that my parents had everything they needed, went back for the first time to give my aunt her pepsin and ask what she would like to have for lunch, it was quite rare that she was not already required to offer an opinion or provide explanations about some event of importance:
– Françoise, imagine, Mme Goupil went past more than a quarter of an hour late going to fetch her sister; if she lingers along the way it wouldn’t surprise me at all if she were to arrive after the elevation.
– Well, there wouldn’t be anything astonishing in that, answered Françoise.
– Françoise, if you had come five minutes earlier you would have seen Mme Imbert go past carrying some asparagus twice as fat as Mère Callot’s; now try to find out from her maid where she got them. 
You have been serving us asparagus in every sauce this year; you of all people might have found some like those for our travellers.
– It wouldn’t be surprising if they came from M. le Curé’s, said Françoise.
– Ah! 
Do you expect me to believe that, my poor Françoise? 
answered my aunt, shrugging her shoulders. 
From M. le Curé’s! 
You know very well he grows only wretched, spindly little asparagus. 
I tell you these were as fat as a woman’s arm. 
Not your arm, of course, but one like mine, poor thing, which has got so much thinner again this year… Françoise, didn’t you hear those chimes that nearly split my head open?
– Ah, my poor girl, you must have a solid head, you can thank the Good Lord for that. 
It was Maguelone coming to get Doctor Piperaud. 
He came back out with her right away and they turned into the rue de l’Oiseau. 
Some child must be ill.
– Oh my, dear God, sighed Françoise, who could not hear of a misfortune occurring to a stranger, even in a distant part of the world, without beginning to lament.
– Françoise, now who were they ringing the passing bell for? 
Oh, dear God, it must have been for Mme Rousseau. 
I’m blessed if I hadn’t forgotten that she passed away the other night. 
Oh, it’s time for the Good Lord to call me home, I don’t know what I’ve done with my head since my poor Octave died. 
But I’m wasting your time, my girl.
– Not at all, Madame Octave, my time is not so precious; He who made it did not sell it to us. 
I’m only just going to see that my fire isn’t out.
In this way Françoise and my aunt together appraised, during that morning session, the first events of the day. 
But sometimes those events assumed a character so mysterious and so grave that my aunt felt she could not wait for the moment when Françoise would come up, and four astounding peals of the bell would echo through the house.
– But Madame Octave, it isn’t time for your pepsin yet, Françoise would say. 
Were you feeling faint?
– Not at all, Françoise, my aunt would say, or rather yes, you know quite well that there are very few occasions now when I don’t feel faint; one day I’ll pass away like Mme Rousseau without even time to collect myself; but that’s not why I rang. 
Would you believe that I just saw Mme Goupil as clearly as I see you now with a little girl whom I don’t know at all? 
Now go fetch two sous’ worth of salt at Camus’s. 
It’s not often that Théodore can’t tell you who someone is.
– But that’ll be M. Pupin’s daughter,’ Françoise would say, preferring to be satisfied with an immediate explanation since she had already been to Camus’s twice that morning.
– M. Pupin’s daughter! 
Oh, do you expect me to believe that, my poor Françoise? 
And you think I wouldn’t have recognized her?
– But I don’t mean the big one, Madame Octave, I mean the little one that’s away at school in Jouy. 
I think I saw her once already this morning.
– Ah! 
That must be it, said my aunt. 
It must be she’s come for the holidays. 
That’s it! 
There’s no need to ask, she will have come for the holidays. 
But then any time now we might very likely see Mme Sazerat come and ring at her sister’s for lunch. 
That’s what it is! 
I saw Galopin’s boy going past with a tart! 
You’ll see, the tart was on its way to Mme Goupil’s.
– Once Mme Goupil has a visitor, Madame Octave, it won’t be long before you’ll see all her folk coming back for lunch, because it’s not so early as it was, said Françoise, who, in a hurry to go back down in order to see to lunch, was not sorry to leave my aunt the prospect of this distraction.
– Oh, not before noon! answered my aunt in a tone of resignation, casting an uneasy glance at the clock, yet furtively so as not to let it be seen that she, who had renounced everything, nevertheless took such a lively pleasure in learning whom Mme Goupil was having to lunch, a pleasure that would unfortunately have to wait a little more than an hour longer. 
‘And on top of that, it will happen during my lunch!’ she added half-aloud to herself. 
Her lunch was enough of a distraction for her so that she did not wish for another one at the same time. 
‘At least you won’t forget to give me my eggs with cream in a flat plate?’ These were the only plates with pictures on them, and my aunt amused herself at each meal by reading the inscription on the one she was served that day. 
She would put on her glasses and spell out: Ali Baba and the Forty Thieves, Aladdin or the Magic Lamp, and smile, saying: ‘Very good, very good.’
– I would certainly have gone to Camus’s… Françoise would say, seeing that now my aunt would not send her there.
– No, no, it’s not worth the trouble any more, it’s certainly Mlle Pupin. 
My poor Françoise, I’m sorry to have made you come up for nothing.
– That must be Mme Sazerat’s dog, Françoise would say, without great conviction but in order to pacify my aunt, and so that she would not ‘split her head in two’.
– As if I didn’t know Mme Sazerat’s dog! my aunt would answer, her critical mind not accepting a fact so easily.
– Ah! 
Then it will be the new dog M. Galopin brought back from Lisieux.
– It seems it’s quite an affable creature, added Françoise, who had got the information from Théodore, as clever as a Christian, always in a good humour, always friendly, always as agreeable as you might wish. 
It’s uncommon for an animal of that age to be so well-behaved already. 
Madame Octave, I will have to leave you, I haven’t time to enjoy myself, here it’s almost ten o’clock, and my stove not lit yet, even, and I still have my asparagus to scrape.
– What, Françoise, more asparagus! 
Why, you’ve got a regular mania for asparagus this year. 
You’ll make our Parisians grow tired of it!
– Why, no, Madame Octave, they like it very much. 
They’ll come home from church with an appetite and you’ll see, they won’t eat it with the backs of their spoons.
– Church; why, they must be there already; you’d do well not to waste any time. 
Go and look after your lunch.
While my aunt was gossiping with Françoise, I was going to Mass with my parents. 
How I loved it, how clearly I can see it again; our Church! 
The old porch by which we entered, black, pocked like a skimming ladle, was uneven and deeply hollowed at the edges (like the font to which it led), as if the gentle brushing of the countrywomen’s cloaks as they entered the church and of their timid fingers taking holy water could, repeated over centuries, acquire a destructive force, bend the stone and carve it with furrows like those traced by the wheel of a cart in a boundary-stone which it knocks against every day. 
Its tombstones, under which the noble dust of the abbots of Combray, who were buried there, formed for the choir a sort of spiritual pavement, were themselves no longer inert and hard matter, for time had softened them and made them flow like honey beyond the bounds of their own square shapes, which, in one place, they had overrun in a flaxen billow, carrying off on their drift a flowered Gothic capital, drowning the white violets of the marble; and into which, elsewhere, they had reabsorbed themselves, further contracting the elliptical Latin inscription, introducing a further caprice in the arrangement of those abridged characters, bringing close together two letters of a word of which the others had been disproportionately distended. 
Its windows never sparkled as much as on the days when the sun hardly appeared, so that, if it was grey outside, we were sure it would be beautiful inside the church; one was filled to its very top by a single figure like a king in a game of cards, who lived up there, under an architectural canopy, between heaven and earth (and in whose slanting blue light, on weekdays sometimes, at noon, when there is no service – at one of those rare times when the church, airy, vacant, more human, luxurious, with some sun on its rich furniture, looked almost habitable, like the hall of sculpted stone and painted glass of a medieval-style mansion – one would see Mme Sazerat kneel for a moment, setting down on the next prayer stool a packet of petits fours tied with string that she had just picked up from the pastry-cook across the street and was going to take back home for lunch); in another, a mountain of pink snow, at whose foot a battle was being fought, seemed to have frosted the very glass itself, which it swelled with its cloudy sleet like a window-pane on which there remained a few snowflakes, but flakes lit by some aurora (by the same, no doubt, that flushed the reredos of the altar with tints so fresh they seemed set there momentarily by a gleam from outside about to vanish, rather than by colours attached for ever to the stone); and all were so old that here and there one saw their silvery age sparkle with the dust of the centuries and show, shimmering and worn down to the thread, the weft of their soft tapestry of glass. 
One of them, a tall compartment, was divided into a hundred or so small rectangular panes in which blue predominated, like a great game of cards resembling the ones that were meant to entertain King Charles VI;1 but either because a beam of sunlight was shining, or because my gaze, as it moved, carried across the glass, snuffed and lit again by turns, a moving precious conflagration, the next moment it had assumed the changing lustre of a peacock’s train, then trembled and undulated in a flaming and chimerical rain that dripped from the top of the dark rocky vault, along the damp walls, as if this were the nave of some grotto iridescent with sinuous stalactites into which I was following my parents, who were carrying their prayer books; a moment later the little lozenge-shaped panes had assumed the deep transparency, the infrangible hardness of sapphires which had been juxtaposed on some immense breast-plate, but behind which one felt, more beloved than all these riches, a momentary smile of sunlight; it was as recognizable in the soft blue billow with which it bathed the precious stones as on the pavement of the square or the straw of the market-place; and even on our first Sundays when we had arrived before Easter, it consoled me for the earth being still bare and black, by bringing into bloom, as in a historical spring-time dating from the age of Saint Louis’s successors, this dazzling gilded carpet of glass forget-me-nots.
Two high-warp tapestries represented the coronation of Esther (tradition had it that Ahasuerus had been given the features of a king of France and Esther those of a lady of Guermantes with whom he was in love), to which their colours, by melting, had added expression, relief, light: a little pink floated over Esther’s lips outside the tracing of their outline; the yellow of her dress spread so unctuously, so thickly, that it acquired a kind of solidity and stood out boldly from the receding atmosphere; and the green of the trees, remaining vivid in the lower parts of the panel of silk and wool, but ‘gone’ at the top, brought out in a paler tone, above the dark trunks, the lofty yellowing branches, gilded and half obliterated by the abrupt, slanting illumination of an invisible sun. 
All this, and still more the precious objects that had come into the church from figures who were for me almost legendary (the gold cross worked, they said, by Saint Eloi2 and given by Dagobert, the tomb of the sons of Louis the Germanic,3 of porphyry and enamelled copper), because of which I moved through the church, when we went to our seats, as though through a valley visited by the fairies, in which a country person is amazed to see in a rock, a tree, a pool, the palpable trace of their supernatural passage, all this made it, for me, something entirely different from the rest of the town: an edifice occupying a space with, so to speak, four dimensions – the fourth being Time – extending over the centuries its nave which, from bay to bay, from chapel to chapel, seemed to vanquish and penetrate not only a few yards but epoch after epoch from which it emerged victorious; hiding the rough, savage eleventh century in the thickness of the walls, from which it appeared with its heavy arches plugged and blinded by crude blocks of ashlar only in the deep gash incised near the porch by the tower staircase, and even there concealed by the graceful Gothic arcades that crowded coquettishly in front of it like older sisters who, to hide him from strangers, place themselves smiling in front of a younger brother who is boorish, sulky and badly dressed; lifting into the heavens above the square a tower which had contemplated Saint Louis and seemed to see him still; and plunging down with its crypt into a Merovingian night, in which, groping their way as they guided us under the dark vault as powerfully ribbed as the wing of an immense stone bat, Théodore and his sister would light for us with a candle the tomb of Sigebert’s4 little daughter, on which a deep scallop – like the mark of a fossil – had been dug, it was said, ‘by a crystal lamp which, on the night the Frankish princess was murdered, had separated of its own accord from the golden chains by which it hung on the site of the present apse and without the crystal breaking, without the flame going out, had sunk deep into the stone which gave way softly under it’.
The apse of the Combray church; what can one say about it? 
It was so crude, so lacking in artistic beauty and even religious spirit. 
From outside, because the street crossing it overlooked was on a lower level, its crude wall rose up from a sub-basement of quite unpolished ashlar, bristling with pebbles, and having nothing particularly ecclesiastical about it, the windows seemed to have been pierced at an excessive height, and the whole looked more like a prison wall than a church wall. 
And certainly, later, when I recalled all the glorious apses I had seen, it would never have occurred to me to compare them with the apse of Combray. 
But, one day, at the bend of a little street in a country town, I noticed, opposite the crossing of three lanes, a rough and unusally high wall with windows pierced far above and the same asymmetrical appearance as the apse of Combray. 
Then I did not ask myself as at Chartres or Rheims how powerfully it expressed religious feeling, but involuntarily exclaimed: ‘The Church!’
The church! 
Familiar; flanked, in the rue Saint-Hilaire, where its north door was situated, by its two neighbours, M. Rapin’s pharmacy and Mme Loiseau’s house, which it touched without any separation; a simple citizen of Combray that could have had its number in the street if the streets of Combray had had numbers, and where it seems that the postman should have had to stop in the morning when he was making his rounds, before going into Mme Loiseau’s and upon coming out of M. Rapin’s, there existed, however, between it and everything that was not it a demarcation that my mind was never able to cross. 
Even though Mme Loiseau might have at her window fuchsias which developed the bad habit of forever allowing their branches to run all over with heads lowered, and whose flowers had no business more pressing, when they were large enough, than to go and cool their flushed, violet cheeks against the dark front of the church, for me the fuchsias did not for this reason become holy; between the flowers and the blackened stone against which they leaned, if my eyes perceived no interval, my mind reserved an abyss.
One could recognize the steeple of Saint-Hilaire from quite far off inscribing its unforgettable form on the horizon where Combray had not yet appeared; when from the train which, in Easter week, was bringing us from Paris, my father caught sight of it as it slipped by turns over all the furrows of the sky and sent its little iron weathercock running in all directions, he would say to us: ‘Come, gather up the rugs, we’re here.’ And on one of the longest walks we took from Combray, there was a spot where the narrow road emerged suddenly on an immense plateau closed at the horizon by jagged forests above which rose only the delicate tip of the steeple of Saint-Hilaire, but so thin, so pink, that it seemed merely scratched on the sky by a fingernail which wanted to give this landscape, this exclusively natural picture, that little mark of art, that indication of human presence. 
When one drew near and could see the remains of the half-destroyed square tower which, not as high, still stood next to it, one was struck most of all by the dark, reddish shade of the stones; and on a misty morning in autumn one might have thought it, rising above the stormy violet of the vineyards, a ruin of purple practically the colour of a wild vine.
Often in the square, when we were coming home, my grandmother would make me stop to look at it. 
From the windows of its tower, placed two by two one above the other, with the exact and original proportion in their spacing that gives beauty and dignity not just to human faces, it loosed, dropped at regular intervals, volleys of crows which, for a moment, circled about shrieking, as if the old stones that allowed them to hop and flutter without appearing to see them had suddenly become uninhabitable and emitted some principle of infinite agitation, struck them and driven them out. 
Then, after striping in every direction the violet velvet of the evening air, they would return suddenly calm to be reabsorbed into the tower, which was no longer baneful but once again benign, a few of them sitting here and there, apparently motionless, but perhaps snapping up some insect, on the tip of a turret, like a seagull as still as a fisherman on the crest of a wave. 
Without really knowing why, my grandmother found in the steeple of Saint-Hilaire that absence of vulgarity, of pretension, of meanness, which made her love and believe rich in beneficent influence not only nature, when the hand of man had not, as did my great-aunt’s gardener, shrunk and reduced it, but also works of genius. 
And certainly, every part of the church that one could see distinguished it from all other buildings by a sort of thoughtfulness that was infused into it, but it was in the steeple that it seemed to become aware of itself, affirm an individual and responsible existence. 
It was the steeple that spoke for it. 
I believe above all that, confusedly, my grandmother found in the steeple of Combray what for her had the highest value in the world, an air of naturalness and an air of distinction. 
Knowing nothing about architecture, she would say: ‘My children, make fun of me if you like, perhaps it isn’t beautiful according to the rules, but I like its strange old face. I’m sure that if it could play the piano it would not play drily.’ And looking at it, following with her eyes the gentle tension, the fervent inclination of its slopes of stone, which approached each other as they rose like hands meeting in prayer, she would join so fully in the effusion of the spire that her gaze seemed to soar with it; and at the same time she would smile in a friendly way at the worn old stones, of which the setting sun now illuminated only the topmost part and which, the moment they entered that sunny region, softened by the light, appeared suddenly to have risen much higher, to be quite far away, like a song taken up again in ‘falsetto’ an octave above.
It was the steeple of Saint-Hilaire that gave all the occupations, all the hours, all the viewpoints of the town their shape, their crown, their consecration. 
From my bedroom, I could see only its base, which had been covered with tiles; but when, on Sunday, I saw them, on a warm summer morning, blazing like a black sun, I would say to myself: ‘Good Heavens! Nine o’clock! I’d better get ready for Mass if I want to have time to go and give Aunt Léonie a kiss first,’ and I knew exactly the colour of the sun on the square, the heat and dust of the market, the shadow made by the awning of the store which Mama would perhaps enter before Mass in an odour of unbleached linen, to buy some handkerchief which would be displayed to her under the direction of the shopkeeper, his chest outthrust, who, as he prepared to close, had just gone into the back of the shop to put on his Sunday jacket and soap his hands, which it was his habit, every five minutes, even in the most melancholy of circumstances, to rub together with an air of enterprise, celebration and success.
When after Mass we went in to ask Théodore to bring us a brioche larger than usual because our cousins had taken advantage of the fine weather to come from Thiberzy to have lunch with us, we would have the steeple there in front of us, itself golden and baked like a greater blessed brioche, with flakes and gummy drippings of sun, pricking its sharp point into the blue sky. 
And in the evening, when I was coming home from a walk and thinking about the moment when I would soon have to say goodnight to my mother and not see her any more, it was on the contrary so soft, in the close of day, that it looked as if it had been set down and crushed like a cushion of brown velvet against the pale sky which had yielded under its pressure, hollowing slightly to give it room and flowing back over its edges; and the cries of the birds that wheeled around it seemed to increase its silence, lift its spire to a greater height and endow it with something ineffable.
As we returned home from Mass, we would often meet M. Legrandin, who was detained in Paris by his profession of engineer and, except during the summer vacation, could come to his property in Combray only from Saturday evening until Monday morning. 
He was one of those men who, quite apart from a career in science in which they have in fact been brilliantly successful, possess an entirely different culture, one that is literary, artistic, which their professional specialization does not make use of and which enriches their conversation. 
Better-read than many men of letters (we did not know at that time that M. Legrandin had a certain reputation as a writer and we were very surprised to see that a famous musician had composed a melody to some verses of his), gifted with more ‘facility’ than many painters, they imagine that the life they are leading is not the one that really suits them and they bring to their actual occupations either an indifference mingled with whimsy, or an application that is sustained and haughty, scornful, bitter and conscientious. 
Tall, with a handsome figure, a fine, thoughtful face with a long, blond moustache and disenchanted blue eyes, exquisitely courteous, a conversationalist such as we had never heard before, he was in the eyes of my family, who always cited him as an example, the epitome of the superior man, approaching life in the noblest and most delicate way. 
My grandmother reproached him only for speaking a little too well, a little too much like a book, for not having the same naturalness in his language as in his loosely knotted lavallière bowties, in his short, straight, almost schoolboyish coat. 
She was also surprised by the fiery tirades he often launched against the aristocracy, against fashionable life, against snobbery, ‘certainly the sin which Saint Paul has in mind when he speaks of the sin for which there is no forgiveness’.
Worldly ambition was a sentiment that my grandmother was so incapable of feeling or even, almost, of understanding, that it seemed to her quite pointless to bring so much ardour to stigmatizing it. 
What was more, she did not think it in very good taste that M. Legrandin, whose sister near Balbec was married to a titled gentleman of Lower Normandy, should indulge himself in such violent attacks against the nobility, going so far as to reproach the Revolution for not having had them all guillotined.
‘Greetings, my friends! he would say, coming up to us. 
How fortunate you are to be able to stay here so much of the time; tomorrow I have to return to Paris, to my niche.
‘Oh! he would add, with his own particular smile, gently ironical, disappointed and slightly distracted, of course my house contains every useless thing in the world. 
It lacks only the one essential, a large piece of sky like this one. 
Always try to keep a piece of sky over your life, little boy, he would add, turning to me. 
You have a lovely soul, of a rare quality, an artist’s nature, don’t ever let it go without what it needs.
’
When we returned home and my aunt sent to ask us if Mme Goupil had been late coming in to Mass, we could not give her any information. 
Instead, we increased her disturbance by telling her there was a painter at work in the church copying the window of Gilbert the Bad. 
Françoise, sent immediately to the grocery, came back empty-handed owing to the absence of Théodore, whose two professions, that of chorister with a part in the upkeep of the church and of grocer’s assistant, gave him connections in all worlds and therefore knowledge that was universal.
‘Ah! sighed my aunt, I wish it were time for Eulalie. 
She’s really the only one who will be able to tell me.
’
Eulalie was a deaf and energetic spinster with a limp who had ‘retired’ after the death of Mme de la Bretonnerie, with whom she had been in service since her childhood, and had then taken a room next to the church, descending from it constantly either for the services or, when there was no service, to say a little prayer or give Théodore a hand; the rest of the time she visited sick people like my Aunt Léonie, to whom she would describe what had happened at Mass or at Vespers. 
She was not above adding some revenue to the small pension paid her by the family of her former employers by going from time to time to look after the curé’s linen or that of some other prominent personality in Combray’s clerical world. 
Above a cloak of black cloth she wore a small white hood almost like a nun’s, and a skin disease gave parts of her cheeks and her hooked nose the bright pink tones of an impatience flower. 
Her visits were the great diversion of my Aunt Léonie, who hardly received anyone else now, apart from M. le Curé. 
My aunt had gradually eliminated all the other visitors because they all made the mistake, in her eyes, of belonging to one or the other of two categories of people whom she detested. 
One group, the worst, whom she had got rid of first, were the ones who advised her not to ‘coddle’ herself and subscribed, if only negatively and showing it only by certain disapproving silences or by certain dubious smiles, to the subversive doctrine that a little walk in the sun and a good rare beefsteak (whereas two wretched sips of Vichy water would lie on her stomach for fourteen hours!) would do her more good than her bed and her medicines. 
The other category was made up of the people who seemed to believe she was more seriously ill than she thought, that she was as seriously ill as she said she was. 
And so, those she had allowed to come up after some hesitation and upon Françoise’s kindly meant entreaties and who, in the course of their visit, had shown how very unworthy they were of the favour being done them by timidly risking a ‘Don’t you think that if you were to move about a little when the weather’s fine,’ or who, on the contrary, when she said to them: ‘I’m very low, very low, this is the end, my poor friends,’ answered her: ‘Ah! when our health fails us! Still, you may last a while longer yet as you are’ – these, the former as well as the latter, were certain never to be received again. 
And if Françoise was amused by my aunt’s horrified look when from her bed she saw one of these people in the rue du Saint-Esprit appearing to come towards her house or when she heard the doorbell ring, she would laugh more heartily still, and as though at a good trick, at my aunt’s ever-victorious ruses for managing to have them turned away, and at their discomfited expressions as they went off without having seen her, and at heart admired her mistress, whom she felt to be superior to all these people since she did not want to receive them. 
In short, my aunt required that her visitors at the same time commend her on her regimen, commiserate with her for her sufferings and encourage her as to her future.
This was where Eulalie excelled. 
My aunt might say to her twenty times in a minute: ‘This is the end, my poor Eulalie,’ twenty times Eulalie would answer: ‘Knowing your illness as you know it, Madame Octave, you will live to be a hundred, as Mme Sazerin was saying to me just yesterday.’ (One of Eulalie’s firmest beliefs, which the impressive number of denials contributed by experience had not been enough to shake, was that Mme Sazerat’s name was Mme Sazerin.)
‘I am not asking to live to a hundred,’ answered my aunt, who preferred not to see her days assigned a precise term.
And since along with this Eulalie knew better than anyone else how to distract my aunt without tiring her, her visits, which took place regularly every Sunday, barring an unforeseen obstacle, were for my aunt a pleasure, the prospect of which kept her on those days in a state that was at first pleasant, but quite soon painful like an excessive hunger, if Eulalie was even a little late. 
Too prolonged, this ecstasy of waiting for Eulalie became a torment, my aunt looked constantly at the time, yawned, felt faint. 
The sound of Eulalie’s ring, if it came at the very end of the day, when she no longer expected it, would almost make her ill. 
The fact was that on Sunday, she thought only of this visit and, as soon as lunch was finished, Françoise would be in a hurry for us to leave the dining-room so that she could go up and ‘occupy’ my aunt. 
But (especially once the fine weather settled in at Combray) a good long time would go by after the haughty hour of noon, descending from the Saint-Hilaire steeple, which it had emblazoned with the twelve momentary rosettes of its sonorous crown, had echoed around our table close to the consecrated bread which had also come in, familiarly, after church, and we would still be sitting in front of the Thousand and One Nights plates, oppressed by the heat and especially by the meal. 
For, upon a permanent foundation of eggs, cutlets, potatoes, jams, biscuits which she no longer even announced to us, Françoise would add – depending on the labours in the fields and orchards, the fruit of the tide, the luck of the market-place, the kindness of neighbours and her own genius, and with the result that our menu, like the quatrefoils carved on the portals of cathedrals in the thirteenth century, reflected somewhat the rhythm of the seasons and the incidents of daily life –: a brill because the monger had guaranteed her that it was fresh, a turkey hen because she had seen a large one at the Roussainville-le-Pin market, cardoons with marrow because she had not made them for us that way before, a roast leg of mutton because fresh air whets the appetite and it would have plenty of time to ‘descend’ in the next seven hours, spinach for a change, apricots because they were still uncommon, gooseberries because in two weeks there would not be any more, raspberries that M. Swann had brought especially, cherries, the first that had come from the cherry tree in the garden after two years in which it had not given any, cream cheese, which I liked very much at one time, an almond cake because she had ordered it the day before, a brioche because it was our turn to present it. 
When all of that was finished, there came a work of art composed expressly for us, but more particularly dedicated to my father who was so fond of it, a chocolate custard, the product of Françoise’s personal inspiration and attention, ephemeral and light as an occasional piece into which she had put all her talent. 
If anyone had refused to taste it, saying: ‘I’m finished, I’m not hungry any more,’ that person would immediately have been relegated to the rank of those barbarians who, even in a gift an artist makes them of one of his works, scrutinize its weight and its material when the only things of value in it are its intention and its signature. 
To leave even a single drop of it on the plate would have been to display the same impoliteness as to stand up before the end of a piece under the very nose of the composer.
At last my mother would say to me: ‘Now, don’t stay here all day, go up to your room if you’re too hot outdoors, but get a little fresh air first so that you don’t start reading right after leaving the table.’ I would go and sit down beside the pump and its trough, often ornamented, like a Gothic font, with a salamander which sculpted on the rough stone the mobile relief of its allegorical tapering body, on the backless bench shaded by a lilac, in the little corner of the garden that opened through a service gate on to the rue du Saint-Esprit and from whose untended earth the scullery rose by two steps, projecting from the house like an independent structure. 
One could see its red paving-stones gleaming like porphyry. 
It looked not so much like Françoise’s lair as a little temple of Venus. 
It overflowed with the offerings of the dairyman, the fruit man, the vegetable monger, who had come sometimes from fairly remote hamlets to dedicate to it the first fruits of their fields. 
And its roof was forever crowned with the coocooing of a dove.
In earlier years I did not linger in the sacred grove surrounding it, since, before going upstairs to read, I would enter the little sitting-room that my Uncle Adolphe, a brother of my grandfather’s and a veteran who had retired with the rank of major, occupied on the ground floor, and which, even when its open windows let in the heat, if not the rays of the sun, which seldom reached that far, gave off inexhaustibly that dark cool smell, of both forest and ancien régime, that makes your nostrils linger in a daydream when you venture into certain abandoned hunting lodges. 
But for a number of years now I had not gone into my Uncle Adolphe’s room, since he no longer came to Combray because of a quarrel that had occurred between him and my family, through my fault, in the following circumstances:
Once or twice a month, in Paris, I used to be sent to pay him a visit, as he was finishing lunch, dressed in a plain jacket, waited on by his servant dressed in a work jacket of violet-and-white-striped drill. 
He would complain that I had not come for a long time, grumble that we were abandoning him; he would offer me a marzipan cake or a tangerine, we would pass through a drawing-room in which no one ever stopped, where no one ever made a fire, whose walls were ornamented with gilded mouldings, its ceilings painted with a blue that was meant to imitate the sky and its furniture upholstered in satin as at my grandparents’, but yellow; then we would go on into what he called his ‘study’, whose walls were hung with some of those engravings depicting, against a dark background, a fleshy pink goddess driving a chariot, standing on a globe, or wearing a star on her forehead, which were admired during the Second Empire5 because they were felt to have a Pompeiian look about them, were then hated, and are beginning to be admired again for one reason and one only, despite the others that are given, and that is that they have such a Second-Empire look about them. 
And I would stay with my uncle until his valet came to him from the coachman to ask what time the latter should harness up. 
My uncle would then sink into a deep meditation while his admiring valet, afraid of disturbing him by the slightest movement, waited curiously for the result, which was always identical. 
At last, after the greatest hesitation, my uncle would unfailingly utter these words: ‘At quarter past two,’ which the valet would repeat with surprise, but without disputing them: ‘At quarter past two? Very good… I’ll go and tell him…’
In those days I loved the theatre, with a platonic love, for my parents had not yet allowed me to enter a theatre, and I pictured to myself so inaccurately the pleasures one might experience there that I was not far from believing that each spectator looked as though into a stereoscope at a scene that was for him alone, though similar to the thousand others being looked at, each one for himself, by the rest of the spectators.
All my conversations with my friends concerned these actors whose art, though unknown to me, was the first form, of all those it assumes, in which Art allowed me a presentiment of what it was. 
Between the manner in which one actor and another delivered, nuanced a declamatory speech, the tiniest differences seemed to me to have an incalculable importance. 
And I would rank them in order of talent, according to what I had been told about them, in lists that I recited to myself all day long, and that in the end hardened in my brain and obstructed it with their immovability.
Later, when I was in school, each time I wrote to a new friend during class as soon as the teacher’ head was turned, my first question was always whether he had been to the theatre yet and whether he thought the greatest actor really was Got, the second-best Delaunay, etc. 
And if, in his opinion, Febvre came only after Thiron, or Delaunay only after Coquelin, the sudden mobility that Coquelin, losing his stony rigidity, would develop in my mind in order to pass to second place, and the miraculous agility, the fecund animation with which Delaunay would be endowed in order to withdraw to fourth, would restore the sensation of flowering and life to my newly supple and fertilized brain.
I heard my uncle grumble, become cross, finally the valet showed me in.
On the table, there was the same plate of marzipan as always; my uncle had on his usual jacket, but across from him, in a pink silk dress with a long string of pearls around her neck, sat a young woman who was eating the last of a tangerine. 
My uncertainty as to whether I should call her Madame or Mademoiselle made me blush and, not daring to turn my eyes too much in her direction for fear of having to talk to her, I went to kiss my uncle. 
She looked at me, smiling, my uncle said to her: ‘My nephew,’ without telling her my name, or telling me hers, probably because, ever since the difficulties he had had with my grandfather, he had been trying as far as possible to avoid any association of his family with this sort of acquaintance.
– But you’ve never seen my niece except in a photograph, said my uncle brusquely.
– I beg your pardon, my dear friend, I passed her on the stairs last year when you were so ill. 
It’ true that I saw her for only a split second and your stairs are quite dark, but that was enough for me to admire her. 
This young man has her beautiful eyes and also that, she said, drawing a line with her finger along the lower part of her forehead. 
Does Madame, your niece, have the same name as you, my dear? 
she asked my uncle.
– He looks like his father more than anyone, muttered my uncle, who was no more anxious to introduce them at a distance by saying Mama’ name than to do so at close quarters. 
‘He is exactly like his father and also my poor mother.
– I don’t know his father, said the lady in pink with a slight inclination of her head, and I never knew your poor mother, my dear. 
You remember, it was shortly after your bereavement that we met.
’
We had gone into the ‘study’, and my uncle, appearing somewhat ill at ease because of my presence, offered her a cigarette.
– No, she said, my dear, you know I’ve become used to the ones the grand-duke sends me. I told him you were jealous. 
And from a case she drew cigarettes covered with gilded foreign writing. 
‘Why yes, she added abruptly, I must have met this young man’ father at your house. 
Isn’t he your nephew? 
How could I have forgotten it? 
He was so good, so exquisite to me,’ she said modestly and sensitively. 
But as I thought about what might have been my father’ rude greeting which she said she had found so exquisite, I, who knew his reserve and his coldness, was embarrassed, as by an indelicacy he had committed, by this disparity between the excessive gratitude that was bestowed on him and his insufficient friendliness. 
It seemed to me later that it was one of the touching aspects of the role of these idle and studious women that they devote their generosity, their talent, a free-floating dream of beauty in love – for, like artists, they do not carry it to fruition, do not bring it into the framework of a shared existence – and a gold that costs them little, to enrich with a precious and refined setting the rough and ill-polished lives of men. 
And just as this one filled the smoking-room, where my uncle was wearing a jacket to receive her, with her gentle person, her dress of pink silk, her pearls, the elegance emanating from the friendship of a grand-duke, so in the same way she had taken some insignificant remark of my father’, had worked it delicately, turned it, given it a precious appellation, and enchasing it with one of her glances of the finest water, tinged with humility and gratitude, had given it back changed into an artistic jewel, into something ‘completely exquisite’.
– Come now, it’ time for you to go, my uncle said to me.
– How nice he is! 
How gallant! 
Why, the boy’ a bit of a ladies’ man already: he takes after his uncle. 
He’ll be a perfect gentleman,8 she added, clenching her teeth to give the phrase a slightly British accent. 
Couldn’t he come have a cup of tea with me sometime, as our neighbours the English say? 
He need only send me a ‘blue’9 in the morning.
I did not know what a ‘blue’ was. 
I did not understand half the words the lady said, but my fear that there was some question concealed in them which it would have been impolite of me not to answer made me keep on listening to them with close attention, and this made me very tired.
– Oh no, that’s not possible, said my uncle, shrugging his shoulders, he’s very busy, he works hard. 
He wins all the prizes at school, he added in a low voice so that I would not hear this lie and contradict it. 
Who knows? 
Perhaps the boy will be a little Victor Hugo, another Vaulabelle,10 you know.
– I adore artists, answered the lady in pink, they’re the only ones who understand women… Besides a few superior creatures like you. 
Excuse my ignorance, my dear, but who is Vaulabelle? 
Is it those gilt-edged volumes in the little glass bookcase in your sitting room? 
You know you promised to lend them to me, I’ll take great care of them.
Despite all the admiration M. Swann professed for these figures of Giotto, for a long time I took no pleasure in contemplating, in our schoolroom, where the copies he had brought back to me had been hung, this Charity without charity, this Envy which looked like nothing more than a plate in a medical book illustrating the compression of the glottis or uvula by a tumour of the tongue or by the introduction of the operating surgeon’s instrument, a Justice whose greyish and meanly regular face was the very same which, in Combray, characterized certain pretty, pious and unfeeling bourgeois ladies I saw at Mass, some of whom had long since been enrolled in the reserve militia of Injustice. 
But later I understood that the startling strangeness, the special beauty of these frescoes was due to the large place which the symbol occupied in them, and the fact that it was represented, not as a symbol, since the thought symbolized was not expressed, but as real, as actually experienced or physically handled, gave something more literal and more precise to the meaning of the work, something more concrete and more striking to the lesson it taught. 
In the case of the poor kitchen-maid, too, wasn’t one’s attention constantly brought back to her belly by the weight that pulled on it; and in the same way, also, the thoughts of the dying are quite often turned towards the aspect of death that is real, painful, dark, visceral, towards the underside of death, which is in fact the side it presents to them and so harshly makes them feel, and which more closely resembles a crushing burden, a difficulty breathing, a need to drink, than what we call the idea of death.
There must have been in those Virtues and Vices of Padua a good deal of reality, since they appeared to me as alive as the pregnant servant, and since she herself did not seem to me much less allegorical. 
And perhaps this (at least apparent) non-participation of a person’s soul in the virtue that is acting through her has also, beyond its aesthetic value, a reality that is, if not psychological, at least, as they say, physiognomical. 
When, later I had occasion to meet, in the course of my life, in convents for instance, truly saintly embodiments of practical charity, they generally had the cheerful, positive, indifferent and brusque air of a busy surgeon, the sort of face in which one can read no commiseration, no pity in the presence of human suffering, no fear of offending it, the sort which is the ungentle face, the antipathetic and sublime face of true goodness.
While the kitchen-maid – involuntarily causing Françoise’s superiority to shine forth, just as Error, by contrast, renders more dazzling the triumph of Truth – served coffee which according to Mama was merely hot water, and then took up to our rooms hot water which was barely lukewarm, I had lain down on my bed, a book in my hand, in my room which tremulously protected its frail transparent coolness from the afternoon sun behind its nearly closed shutters, through which a gleam of daylight had nonetheless contrived to pass its yellow wings and remained motionless between the wood and the window-pane, in a corner, like a poised butterfly. 
It was barely light enough to read, and the sensation of the splendid brightness of the day came to me only from the blows struck in the rue de la Cure by Camus (told by Françoise that my aunt was ‘not resting’ and that one could make noise) against some dusty crates, which, however, reverberating in the sonorous atmosphere peculiar to hot weather, seemed to send scarlet stars flying into the distance; and also by the houseflies that performed for me, in a little concert, a sort of chamber music of summer: this music does not evoke summer in the same way as a melody of human music, which, when you happen to hear it during the warm season, afterwards reminds you of it; it is connected to the summer by a more necessary bond: born of the fine days, born again only with them, containing a little of their essence, it not only awakens their image in our memory, it guarantees their return, their presence, actual, ambient, immediately accessible.
This dim coolness of my room was to the full sun of the street what a shadow is to a ray of light, that is to say, it was just as luminous and offered my imagination the full spectacle of summer, which my senses, had I been out walking, could have enjoyed only piecemeal; and so it was quite in harmony with my repose, which (because of the stirring adventures narrated in my books) sustained, like the repose of an unmoving hand in the midst of a stream of water, the shock and animation of a torrent of activity.
But my grandmother, even if the hot weather had turned bad, if a storm or merely a squall had arisen, would come and beg me to go out. 
And not wanting to stop my reading, I would go and continue it in the garden, at least, under the chestnut tree, in a little hooded chair of wicker and canvas, in the depths of which I would sit and think I was hidden from the eyes of the people who might come and pay a visit to my parents.
After this central belief, which moved incessantly during my reading from inside to outside, towards the discovery of the truth, came the emotions aroused in me by the action in which I was taking part, for those afternoons contained more dramatic events than does, often, an entire lifetime. 
These were the events taking place in the book I was reading; it is true that the people affected by them were not ‘real’, as Françoise said. 
But all the feelings we are made to experience by the joy or the misfortune of a real person are produced in us only through the intermediary of an image of that joy or that misfortune; the ingeniousness of the first novelist consisted in understanding that in the apparatus of our emotions, the image being the only essential element, the simplification that would consist in purely and simply abolishing real people would be a decisive improvement. 
A real human being, however profoundly we sympathize with him, in large part is perceived by our senses, that is to say, remains opaque to us, offers a dead weight that our sensibilities cannot lift. 
If a calamity should strike him, it is only in a small part of the total notion we have of him that we will be able to be moved by this, even more, it is only in a part of the total notion he has of himself that he will be able to be moved himself. 
The novelist’s happy discovery was to have the idea of replacing these parts, impenetrable to the soul, by an equal quantity of immaterial parts, that is to say, parts which our soul can assimilate. 
What does it matter, thenceforth, if the actions, the emotions of this new order of creatures seem to us true, since we have made them ours, since it is within us that they occur, that they hold sway, as we feverishly turn the pages of the book, over the rapidity of our breathing and the intensity of our gaze. 
And once the novelist has put us in that state, in which, as in all purely mental states, every emotion is multiplied tenfold, in which his book will disturb us as might a dream but a dream more lucid than those we have while sleeping and one whose memory will last longer, then see how, for the space of an hour, he sets loose in us all possible happinesses and all possible unhappinesses, just a few of which we would spend years of our lives coming to know and the most intense of which would never be revealed to us because the slowness with which they occur prevents us from perceiving them; (thus our heart changes, in life, and it is the worst pain; but we know it only through reading, through our imagination: in reality it changes, as certain phenomena of nature occur, slowly enough so that, even if we are able to observe successively each of its different states, we are still spared the actual sensation of change).
This was not only because an image of which we dream remains for ever stamped, is adorned and enriched, by the glimmer of the colours not its own that may happen to surround it in our daydream; for the landscapes in the books I read were for me not merely landscapes more vividly portrayed in my imagination than those which Combray set before my eyes but otherwise analogous. 
Because the author had chosen them, because of the faith with which my mind went to meet his word as though it were a revelation, they seemed to be – an impression hardly ever given me by the countryside in which I happened to be, and especially by our garden, the unmagical product of the perfectly correct conception of the gardener so despised by my grandmother – an actual part of Nature itself, worthy to be studied and explored.
I was sometimes dragged away from my reading, in the middle of the afternoon, by the gardener’s daughter, who would run like a lunatic, overturning an orange tree in its tub as she went by, cutting a finger, breaking a tooth and shouting, ‘They’re coming, they’re coming!’ so that Françoise and I should run out too and not miss any of the show. 
This was on the days when the regiment passed through Combray on its way to garrison manoeuvres, generally going down the rue de Sainte-Hildegarde. 
While our servants, sitting in a row on chairs outside the railings, watched the people of Combray taking their Sunday walk and allowed themselves to be watched in turn, the gardener’s daughter through a slit left between two distant houses in the avenue de la Gare had caught sight of the glitter of helmets. 
The servants had rushed to bring in their chairs, for when the cuirassiers paraded down the rue Sainte-Hildegarde, they filled its entire breadth, and the cantering horses grazed the houses, covering pavements submerged like banks that offer too narrow a bed to a torrent unleashed.
– Poor children, said Françoise, having barely reached the railings and already in tears; poor boys, to be mown down like grass in a meadow; the very thought of it gives me a shock, she added, putting her hand on her heart, where she had received that shock.
– A fine sight, isn’t it, Madame Françoise, all these youngsters with no care for their lives? 
said the gardener to get a ‘rise’ out of her.
– No care for their lives? 
Well, now, what should we care for if we don’t care for our lives, the only gift the dear Lord never gives us twice over? 
Alas, dear God! 
It’s quite true, though, they don’t care! 
I saw them in ’70; in those wretched wars they’ve no fear of death left in them; they’re nothing more nor less than madmen; and then they’re not worth the rope to hang them with; they’re not men any more, they’re lions. 
(For Françoise, the comparison of a man to a lion, which she pronounced lie-on, was not at all complimentary.)
The rue Sainte-Hildegarde turned too sharply for us to be able to see anything coming from far off, and it was through that slit between the two houses in the avenue de la Gare that we saw more and more new helmets flowing and shining in the sun. 
The gardener wanted to know if there were many more still to come, and he was thirsty, because the sun was beating down. 
So, all of a sudden, his daughter, leaping out as though from a place besieged, would sally forth, gain the corner of the street, and after braving death a hundred times, come back to us bringing, along with a carafe of licorice water, the news that there were at least a thousand of them coming without a break from the direction of Thiberzy and Méséglise. 
Françoise and the gardener, reconciled, would discuss what action should be taken in case of war.
– You see, Françoise, said the gardener, revolution would be better, because when they declare a revolution, it’s only them that wants to that goes.
– Well now, at least I can understand that, it’s more honest.
The gardener believed that when war was declared they would stop all the railway trains.
– Of course! 
So we doesn’t run off, said Françoise.
And the gardener: ‘Oh, they’re clever ones!’ because he would not admit that war was not a kind of bad trick that the State tried to play on the people, and that if only they had the means to do it, there was not a single person who would not have run away from it.
But Françoise would hurry back to my aunt, I would return to my book, the servants would settle in front of the gate again to watch as the dust subsided along with the emotion roused by the soldiers. 
Long after calm had descended, an unaccustomed flow of people out walking would continue to darken the streets of Combray. 
And in front of each house, even those where it was not the custom, the servants or even the masters, sitting and watching, would festoon the sill with a border as dark and irregular as the border of sea-weed and shells whose crêpe and embroidery are left on the shore by a strong tide after it recedes.
Except on those days, however, I could usually read in peace. 
But the interruption and the commentary that a visit of Swann’s once produced as I was in the midst of reading a book by an author quite new to me, Bergotte, had the consequence that for a long time afterwards it was not against a wall adorned with spikes of violet flowers, but against a quite different background, before the portal of a Gothic cathedral, that the image now appeared of one of the women I dreamed of.
Before he saw them, simply from hearing the name, which quite often had nothing particularly Jewish about it, he would guess not only the Jewish background of those of my friends who were in fact Jewish, but even whatever might be distressing about their family.
– And what is the name of this friend of yours who’s coming this evening?
And after adroitly asking us a few more specific questions, he would cry out: ‘On guard! On guard!’ or, if it was the victim himself, already there, whom he had forced, by a subtle interrogation, unwittingly to confess his origins, then, to show us he no longer had any doubts, he would simply gaze at us while barely perceptibly humming:
These little idiosyncrasies of my grandfather’s did not imply any feeling of ill-will towards my friends. 
But Bloch had displeased my family for other reasons. 
He had begun by irritating my father, who, noticing that he was wet, had said to him with lively interest:
– Why, Monsieur Bloch, what’s the weather like? 
Has it been raining? 
I don’t understand this at all, the barometer couldn’t have been better.
The only answer he had drawn from him had been this:
– Monsieur, I absolutely cannot tell you if it has been raining. 
I live so resolutely beyond physical contingencies that my senses do not bother to notify me of them.
– Why, my poor son, that friend of yours is an idiot, my father had said to me when Bloch had gone. 
My goodness! 
He can’t even tell me what the weather’s like! 
Why, nothing’s more interesting than that! 
He’s an imbecile.
Then Bloch had displeased my grandmother because after lunch, when she said she was feeling a little indisposed, he had stifled a sob and wiped away a few tears.
– How can you tell me he’s sincere, she said to me. 
He doesn’t know me; unless he’s out of his mind, of course.
And finally he had annoyed everyone because, having come for lunch an hour-and-a-half late covered with mud, instead of apologizing, he had said:
– I never allow myself to be influenced either by atmospheric perturbations or by the conventional divisions of time. 
I would happily instate the use of the opium pipe and the Malay kris,21 but I know nothing about the use of these infinitely more pernicious and also insipidly bourgeois implements, the watch and the umbrella.
He would have returned to Combray despite all this. 
He was not, of course, the friend my parents would have wanted for me; in the end they had believed that the tears he shed over my grandmother’s indisposition were not feigned; but they knew, either instinctively or from experience, that our impulsive emotions have little influence over the course of our actions or the conduct of our lives, and that regard for moral obligations, loyalty to friends, the completion of a piece of work, obedience to a rule of life, have a surer foundation in blind habits than in those momentary transports, ardent and sterile. 
They would have preferred for me, instead of Bloch, companions who would have given me no more than is suitable to give one’s friends, according to the laws of bourgeois morality; who would not unexpectedly send me a basket of fruits because they had been thinking of me with affection that day, but who, being incapable of tipping in my favour the correct balance of the obligations and claims of friendship by a simple impulse of their imagination and sensibility, would also not tamper with it to my detriment. 
Even our offences will not easily divert from their duty towards us those natures of which the model was my great-aunt, who, estranged for years from a niece to whom she never spoke, did not for this reason change the will in which she left that niece her entire fortune, because she was her closest relative and it ‘was proper’.
But I liked Bloch, my parents wanted to make me happy, the insoluble problems I posed for myself concerning the meaningless beauty of the daughter of Minos and Pasiphaé tired me more and made me more ill than further conversations with him would have done, even though my mother felt they were harmful. 
And he would still have been received at Combray, if, after that dinner, having just informed me – news that later had a great deal of influence on my life and made it first happier, then less happy – that every woman thought only about love and that there was not one whose resistance could not be overcome, he had not assured me that he had heard most positively that my great-aunt had had a tempestuous youth and had been known as a kept woman. 
I could not stop myself from repeating these remarks to my parents, he was shown the door when he returned, and when I went up to him afterwards in the street, he was extremely cold to me.
But on the subject of Bergotte what he had said was true.
One Sunday, as I was reading in the garden, I was disturbed by Swann, who had come to see my parents.
– What are you reading? 
May I look? 
Well, well! 
Bergotte! 
Now, who told you about his books? 
I said it was Bloch.
– Ah, yes! 
The boy I saw here once, who looks so much like the portrait of Mohammed II by Bellini.23 
Oh, it’s quite striking! 
He has the same circumflex eyebrows, the same curved nose, the same jutting cheekbones. 
When he has a goatee, he’ll be the same person. 
Well, he has good taste, in any case, because Bergotte is quite enchanting. 
And seeing how much I appeared to admire Bergotte, Swann, who never talked about the people he knew, out of kindness made an exception and said to me:
– I know him very well. 
If you would like him to write a few words in the front of your book, I could ask him.
’
I did not dare accept his offer, but asked Swann some questions about Bergotte. 
‘Could you tell me which is his favourite actor?’
– Actor? 
I don’t know. 
But I do know that he doesn’t consider any man on the stage equal to La Berma; he puts her above everyone else. 
Have you seen her?
– No, Monsieur, my parents don’t allow me to go to the theatre.
– Are there any books by Bergotte in which he talks about La Berma? 
I asked M. Swann.
– I think so, in his slim little volume on Racine, but it must be out of print. 
There may have been a reissue, though. 
I’ll find out. 
I can also ask Bergotte anything you like; there isn’t a week in the whole year when he doesn’t come to dinner at our house. 
He’s my daughter’s greatest friend. 
They go off together visiting old towns, cathedrals, castles.
While I read in the garden, something my great-aunt would not have understood my doing except on a Sunday, a day when it is forbidden to occupy oneself with anything serious and when she did not sew (on a weekday, she would have said to me ‘What? Still amusing yourself with a book? This isn’t Sunday, you know,’ giving the word amusement the meaning of childishness and waste of time), my Aunt Léonie would gossip with Françoise, waiting until it was time for Eulalie. 
She would announce that she had just seen Mme Goupil go by ‘without an umbrella, in that silk dress she had made for her at Châteaudun. If she has far to go before Vespers, she could very well get it properly drenched.’
‘Maybe, maybe’ (meaning maybe not), said Françoise so as not to rule out absolutely the possibility of a more favourable alternative.
‘Oh dear, said my aunt, striking her forehead, that reminds me I never found out if she arrived at church after the elevation. 
I will have to remember to ask Eulalie… Françoise, just look at that black cloud behind the steeple, and that pitiful sunlight on the slates. 
It’s sure to rain before the day is done. 
It couldn’t possibly stay like this, it was too hot. 
And the sooner the better, because until the storm breaks, my Vichy water won’t go down,’ added my aunt, in whose mind her desire to hasten the descent of her Vichy water was infinitely more important than her fear of seeing Mme Goupil ruin her dress.
– And the fact is, when it rains on the square there isn’t much shelter. 
What, three o’clock? 
my aunt cried out suddenly, turning pale, why, my goodness, Vespers has begun and I’ve forgotten my pepsin! 
Now I know why my Vichy water was lying on my stomach.
And swooping down on a missal bound in violet velvet, with gilt clasps, from which, in her haste, she let escape a few of those pictures edged with a band of yellowing paper lace that mark the pages of the feast days, my aunt, while swallowing her drops, began reading the sacred texts as fast as she could, her comprehension of them slightly obscured by her uncertainty as to whether the pepsin, taken so long after the Vichy water, would still be able to catch up with it and make it go down. 
‘Three o’clock! It’s unbelievable how the time passes!’
A little tap against the window-pane, as though something had struck it, followed by a copious light spill, as of grains of sand dropping from a window above, then the spill extending, growing regular, finding a rhythm, turning fluid, resonant, musical, immeasurable, universal: it was the rain.
– Well, now, Françoise! 
What did I tell you? 
How it’s coming down! 
But I think I heard the bell at the garden gate: go and see who could be outside in such weather.
– It was Mme Amédée (my grandmother) – she said she was going for a little walk. 
And yet it’s raining hard.
– That doesn’t surprise me at all, said my aunt, lifting her eyes to the skies. 
I’ve always said that her way of thinking is different from everyone else’s. 
I’d rather it be her than me outdoors just now.
– Mme Amédée is always as different as she can be from everyone else,’ said Françoise gently, refraining until she should be alone with the other servants from saying that she believed my grandmother was a little ‘touched’.
‘Now, see? 
The Benediction is over! 
Eulalie won’t be coming, sighed my aunt; the weather must have frightened her away.
– But it’s not five o’clock, Madame Octave, it’s only half-past four.
– Only half-past four? 
And I had to raise the little curtains to get a wretched glimmer of daylight. 
At half-past four! 
One week before the Rogations! 
Oh, my poor Françoise, the Good Lord must be sorely vexed with us. 
The world is going too far these days! 
As my poor Octave used to say, we have forgotten the Good Lord too often and he’s taking his revenge.
A bright flush enlivened my aunt’s cheeks; it was Eulalie. 
Unfortunately, scarcely had she been shown in before Françoise returned and, with a smile that was meant to indicate her participation in the joy she was sure her words would give my aunt, articulating the syllables to show that, despite her use of the indirect style, she was reporting, good servant that she was, the very words the visitor had condescended to use:
– M. le Curé would be delighted, enchanted, if Mme Octave is not resting and could see him. 
M. le Curé does not wish to disturb. 
M. le Curé is downstairs; I told him to go into the parlour.
In fact, the curé’s visits did not give my aunt as much pleasure as Françoise supposed, and the air of jubilation with which Françoise thought she must illuminate her face each time she had to announce him did not entirely correspond to the invalid’s feelings. 
The curé (an excellent man with whom I am sorry I did not have more conversations, for if he understood nothing about the arts, he did know many etymologies), being in the habit of enlightening distinguished visitors with information about the church (he even intended to write a book about the parish of Combray), fatigued her with endless explanations that were in fact always the same. 
But when his visit came at the very same time as Eulalie’s, it became frankly unpleasant for my aunt. 
She would have preferred to make the most of Eulalie and not have all her company at once. 
But she did not dare decline to see the curé and only made a sign to Eulalie not to leave at the same time, so that she could keep her there by herself for a little while after he was gone.
– Monsieur le Curé, what’s this they’ve been telling me, that a painter has set up his easel in your church and is copying a window? 
I must say, old as I am, I’ve never in my life heard of such a thing! 
What is the world coming to? 
And the ugliest part of the church, too!
– I’m sure that if you asked the Bishop, my aunt said feebly, beginning to think she was going to be tired, he would not refuse you a new window.
– You may depend upon it, Madame Octave, answered the curé. 
But it was His Grace himself who started all the fuss about this wretched window by proving that it represented Gilbert the Bad, Sire de Guermantes, a direct descendant of Geneviève de Brabant, who was a Demoiselle de Guermantes, receiving absolution from Saint Hilaire.
– Why, in the corner of the window – you never noticed a lady in a yellow dress? 
Well, now, that’s Saint Hilaire, who in certain provinces is also called, you know, Saint Illiers, Saint Hélier, and even, in the Jura, Saint Ylie. 
And these various corruptions of sanctus Hilarius are not the most curious that have occurred in the names of the blessed. 
For instance, your own patron, my good Eulalie, sancta Eulalia – do you know what she is in Burgundy? 
Saint Éloi, quite simply: she has become a male saint. 
You see, Eulalie? 
– after you die they will turn you into a man.
– Gilbert’s brother, Charles the Stammerer, was a pious prince but, having early in life lost his father, Pépin the Mad, who died as a result of his mental infirmity, he wielded the supreme power with all the arrogance of a man who has had no discipline in his youth, and, whenever he saw a man in a town whose face he didn’t like, would massacre every last inhabitant. 
Gilbert, wishing to take revenge on Charles, caused the church of Combray to be burned down, the original church at the time, which Théodebert, when he and his court left the country house he had near here, at Thiberzy (which would be Theodeberciacus), to go to fight the Burgundians, had promised to build over the tomb of Saint Hilaire if the Blessed One would grant him the victory. 
Nothing remains of it now but the crypt which Théodore must have taken you down into, for Gilbert burned the rest. 
Finally, he defeated the unfortunate Charles with the help of William the Conqueror’ (the curé pronounced it Will’am), ‘which is why so many English people come to see it. 
But he apparently was unable to win the affection of the people of Combray, for they rushed upon him as he was coming out of Mass and cut off his head. 
Théodore has a little book he lends out to people that explains it all.
‘But what is unquestionably the most extraordinary thing about our church is the view from the belfry, which is magnificent. 
Certainly in your case, since you’re not strong, I would never advise you to climb our ninety-seven steps, exactly half the number of the celebrated dome in Milan. 
It’s quite tiring enough for someone in good health, especially as you must go up bent double if you don’t want to crack your head, and you collect all the cobwebs off the stairwell on your clothes. 
In any case you would have to wrap yourself up quite snugly,’ he added (without noticing my aunt’s indignation at the idea that she was capable of climbing into the belfry), ‘because there’s quite a breeze once you get to the top! Some people declare they have felt the chill of death up there. Nonetheless, on Sundays there are always groups coming even from a long way off to admire the beauty of the panorama, and they go away enchanted. Now next Sunday, if the weather holds, you’ll be sure to find some people there, since it’s Rogation Day. It really must be admitted, though, that from that spot the scene is magical, with what you might call vistas over the plain that have quite a special charm of their own. On a clear day, you can see all the way to Verneuil. But the great thing is that you can see all in one glance things you can’t usually see except one without the other, like the course of the Vivonne and the ditches at Saint-Assise-lès-Combray, which are separated by a screen of tall trees, or the different canals at Jouy-le Vicomte (Gaudiacus vice comitis, as you know). Each time I’ve gone to Jouy-le-Vicomte, of course, I’ve seen a bit of the canal, and then I’ve turned a corner and seen another bit, but by then I could no longer see the preceding bit. I could put them together in my mind, but that didn’t have much of an effect for me. But from the Saint-Hilaire belfry it’s different, the whole area seems to have been caught in a great web. Only you can’t see any water; it’s as though there were great clefts slicing up the town into different neighbourhoods so neatly it looks like a brioche which still holds together after it has been cut up. To do it right, you’d have to be in both places at the same time, in the steeple of Saint Hilaire and at Jouy-le-Vicomte.’
The curé had so exhausted my aunt that he was scarcely gone before she had to send Eulalie away too.
– Here, my poor Eulalie, she said weakly, drawing a coin from a little purse that she had within reach of her hand, this is so that you won’t forget me in your prayers.
– Oh, Madame Octave! 
I don’t know if I should; you know I don’t come here for that! 
Eulalie would say with the same hesitation and the same awkwardness, each time, as if it were the first, and with an appearance of dissatisfaction that cheered my aunt but did not displease her, because if one day Eulalie looked a little less vexed than usual as she took the coin, my aunt would say:
– I don’t know what was bothering Eulalie; I gave her the same as usual, but yet she didn’t look happy.
– I think she has nothing to complain about, all the same, Françoise would sigh, inclined to consider as small change anything my aunt gave her for herself or her children and as treasure madly squandered on an ingrate the little coins placed in Eulalie’s hand each Sunday, but so discreetly that Françoise never managed to see them. 
It was not that Françoise would have wanted for herself the money my aunt gave Eulalie. 
She took sufficient pleasure in what my aunt possessed, knowing that the mistress’s wealth both elevated and embellished her servant in everyone’s eyes; and that she, Françoise, was distinguished and renowned in Combray, Jouy-le-Vicomte and other places, on account of my aunt’s many farms, the curé’s frequent and extended visits, the singular number of bottles of Vichy water consumed. 
She was greedy only for my aunt; if it had been up to her to manage my aunt’s fortune, which would have been her dream, she would have preserved it from the encroachments of others with a maternal ferocity. 
She would not, however, have seen any great harm in what my aunt, whom she knew to be incurably generous, allowed herself to give away, as long as it went to rich people. 
Perhaps she thought that they, having no need of gifts from my aunt, could not be suspected of liking her because of them. 
Besides, gifts made to people of eminence and wealth, like Mme Sazerat, M. Swann, M. Legrandin, Mme Goupil, to persons ‘of the same rank’ as my aunt who ‘were well matched’, appeared to her to belong to the customs of the strange and brilliant life of the rich who hunt, give balls, visit back and forth, people whom she admired and smiled upon. 
But it was not the same if the beneficiaries of my aunt’s generosity were what Françoise called ‘people like me, people who are no better than me’, the ones of whom she was most scornful unless they called her ‘Madame Françoise’ and considered themselves to be ‘less than her’. 
And when she saw that despite her advice my aunt did just as she pleased and threw her money away – as Françoise saw it, at least – on the unworthy, she began to think the gifts my aunt made to her were quite small compared to the imaginary sums lavished on Eulalie. 
There was not a single farm in the vicinity of Combray so substantial that Françoise did not suppose Eulalie could easily have bought it with all she earned from her visits. 
It is true that Eulalie formed the same estimate of the immense and hidden riches of Françoise. 
It was Françoise’s habit, when Eulalie had gone, to make unkind predictions about her. 
She detested her, but she was also afraid of her and believed that when Eulalie was there she had to present a ‘good face’. 
She made up for it after Eulalie’s departure, without ever naming her, in fact, but proffering sibylline oracles, or pronouncements of a general character like those in Ecclesiastes, whose application could not escape my aunt. 
After watching through a corner of the curtain to see if Eulalie had closed the gate behind her, she would say: ‘Flatterers know how to make themselves welcome and collect a little pocket money; but have patience, the Good Lord will punish them all one fine day,’ with the sidelong glance and the insinuation of Joas thinking only of Athalie when he says:
Le bonheur des méchants comme un torrent s’écoule.26
But when the curé had come as well and his interminable visit had exhausted my aunt’s strength, Françoise would leave the bedroom behind Eulalie and say:
– Madame Octave, I will let you rest, you look very tired.
And my aunt would not even answer, breathing a sigh that must, it seemed, be the last, her eyes closed, as though dead. 
But scarcely had Françoise gone down, than four peals dealt with the greatest violence would echo through the house, and my aunt, upright on her bed, would cry out:
– Has Eulalie gone yet? 
Can you believe it – I forgot to ask her if Mme Goupil arrived at Mass before the elevation! 
Quick, run after her!
But Françoise would return without having been able to catch up with Eulalie.
– It’s vexing, my aunt would say, shaking her head. 
The only important thing I had to ask her!
When I say that except for very rare events, like that confinement, my aunt’s routine never suffered any variation, I am not speaking of those variations which, always the same and repeated at regular intervals, introduced into the heart of that uniformity only a sort of secondary uniformity. 
And so, for instance, every Saturday, because Françoise went to the Roussainville-le-Pin market in the afternoon, lunch was, for everyone, an hour earlier. 
And my aunt had so thoroughly acquired the habit of this weekly violation of her habits that she clung to this habit as much as to the others. 
She was so well ‘routined’ to it, as Françoise said, that if she had had to wait, some Saturday, to have lunch at the regular hour, this would have ‘disturbed’ her as much as if on another day she had had to move her lunch forward to the Saturday hour. 
What was more, this early lunch gave Saturday, for all of us, a special face, indulgent and almost kindly. 
At a time when one usually has one more hour to live through before the relaxation of the meal, we knew that in a few seconds we would see the arrival of some precocious endives, a gratuitous omelette, an undeserved beefsteak. 
The return of this asymmetrical Saturday was one of those little events, internal, local, almost civic, which, in peaceful lives and closed societies, create a sort of national bond and become the favourite theme of conversations, jokes, stories wantonly exaggerated: it would have been the ready-made nucleus for a cycle of legends, if one of us had had a propensity for the epic. 
First thing in the morning, before we were dressed, for no reason, for the pleasure of feeling the strength of our comradeship, we would say to one another with good humour, with warmth, with patriotism: ‘There’s no time to lose; don’t forget – it’s Saturday!’ while my aunt, conferring with Françoise and remembering that the day would be longer than usual, would say: ‘You might make them a nice bit of veal, since it’s Saturday.’ If at ten-thirty one of us absentmindedly drew out his watch and said: ‘Let’s see, still an hour-and-a-half before lunch,’ everyone was delighted to have to say to him: ‘Come now, what are you thinking of, you’re forgetting it’s Saturday!’; we would still be laughing over it a quarter of an hour after and we would promise ourselves to go up and report this lapse to my aunt to amuse her. 
Even the face of the sky seemed changed. 
After lunch, the sun, aware that it was Saturday, would linger an hour longer at the top of the sky, and when someone, thinking we were late for our walk, said: ‘What, only two o’clock?’, watching, as they passed, the two strokes from the Saint-Hilaire steeple (which usually do not encounter anyone yet on paths deserted because of the midday meal or the afternoon nap, alongside the lively white stream which even the fisherman has abandoned, and go on alone into the empty sky where only a few lazy clouds remain), we would all answer him in chorus: ‘But you’re wrong, we had lunch an hour early; you know very well it’s Saturday!’ The surprise of a barbarian (this was what we called anyone who did not know what was special about Saturday) who, arriving at eleven o’clock to talk to my father, found us at the table, was one of the things in her life which most amused Françoise. 
But if she found it funny that the dumbfounded visitor did not know we had lunch earlier on Saturday, she found it even more comical (while at the same time sympathizing from the bottom of her heart with this narrow chauvinism) that my father himself had not realized that the barbarian might not know this and had responded with no further explanation to his astonishment at seeing us already in the dining-room: ‘Well what do you expect, it’s Saturday!’ Having reached this point in her story, she would wipe away a few tears of hilarity and to increase her own pleasure, would prolong the dialogue, invent what had been said in answer by the visitor, to whom this ‘Saturday’ did not explain anything. 
And quite far from complaining about her embellishments, we would feel they were not enough for us and we would say: ‘But I think he also said something else. It was longer the first time you told it.’ Even my great-aunt would put down her needlework, lift her head and look over her glasses.
What was also special about Saturday was that on this day, during the month of May, we would go out after dinner to attend the ‘Month of Mary’.
Suddenly my father would stop us and ask my mother: ‘Where are we?’ Exhausted from walking but proud of him, she would admit tenderly that she had absolutely no idea. 
He would shrug his shoulders and laugh. 
Then, as if he had taken it out of his jacket pocket along with his key, he would show us the little back gate of our own garden, which stood there before us, having come, along with the corner of the rue du Saint-Esprit, to wait for us at the end of these unfamiliar streets. 
My mother would say to him with admiration: ‘You are astonishing!’ And from that moment on, I did not have to take another step, the ground walked for me through that garden where for so long now my actions had ceased to be accompanied by any deliberate attention: Habit had taken me in its arms, and it carried me all the way to my bed like a little child.
One Sunday when my aunt had had a visit from the curé and Eulalie at the same time and had afterwards rested, we all went up to say good evening to her, and Mama offered her her condolences on the bad luck that always brought her visitors at the same hour:
– I know that things turned out badly again this afternoon, Léonie,’ she said to her gently, ‘you had all your company here at the same time.
Which my great-aunt interrupted with: ‘Too much of a good thing can do no harm…’ because, ever since her daughter had become ill, she had believed it was her duty to cheer her up by consistently showing her the bright side of everything. 
But now my father spoke:
– I would like to take advantage, he said, of the fact that the whole family is together to tell you all about something without having to begin all over again with each of you separately. 
I’m afraid we’ve had a falling-out with Legrandin: he barely said hello to me this morning.
Now the lady whom Legrandin was accompanying was a virtuous and esteemed person; it was quite out of the question that he was having an affair and embarrassed at being found out, and my father wondered how he might have annoyed Legrandin. 
‘I would be especially sorry to know he is vexed,’ said my father, ‘because of the fact that among all those people dressed up in their Sunday best there is something about him, with his little straight jacket, his loose tie, that is so uncontrived, so truly simple, an air of ingenuousness, almost, that is extremely likeable.’ But the family council was unanimously of the opinion that my father was imagining things, or that Legrandin, at that particular moment, was absorbed in some other thought. 
And in fact my father’s apprehension was dispelled the very next evening. 
As we were returning from a long walk, near the Pont-Vieux we saw Legrandin, who because of the holidays was staying in Combray for a few days. 
He came up to us with his hand outstretched: ‘My young bookworm, he asked me, do you know this line by Paul Desjardins:
Les bois sont déjà noirs, le ciel est encor bleu.31
Isn’t that a fine rendering of this hour of the day? 
Perhaps you’ve never read Paul Desjardins. 
Read him, my child; today he is transforming himself, they tell me, into a sermonizing friar, but for a long time he was a limpid water-colourist…
May the sky remain for ever blue for you, my young friend; and even at the hour which is now approaching for me, when the woods are dark already, when night is falling fast, you will console yourself as I do by looking up towards the sky.
’ He took a cigarette out of his pocket, remained for a long time with his eyes on the horizon. 
‘Good-bye, friends,’ he said to us suddenly, and he left us.
At the hour when I usually went downstairs to find out what the menu was, dinner would already have been started, and Françoise, commanding the forces of nature, which were now her assistants, as in fairy plays where giants hire themselves out as cooks, would strike the coal, entrust the steam with some potatoes to cook and make the fire finish to perfection the culinary masterpieces first prepared in potters’ vessels that ranged from great vats, casseroles, cauldrons and fishkettles to terrines for game, moulds for pastry and little jugs for cream, and included a complete collection of pans of every shape and size. 
I would stop by the table, where the kitchen-maid had just shelled them, to see the peas lined up and tallied like green marbles in a game; but what delighted me were the asparagus, steeped in ultramarine and pink, whose tips, delicately painted with little strokes of mauve and azure, shade off imperceptibly down to their feet – still soiled though they are from the dirt of their garden-bed – with an iridescence that is not of this earth. 
It seemed to me that these celestial hues revealed the delicious creatures who had merrily metamorphosed themselves into vegetables and who, through the disguise of their firm, edible flesh, disclosed in these early tints of dawn, in these beginnings of rainbows, in this extinction of blue evenings, the precious essence that I recognized again when, all night long following a dinner at which I had eaten them, they played, in farces as crude and poetic as a fairy play by Shakespeare, at changing my chamber pot into a jar of perfume.
Poor Giotto’s Charity, as Swann called her, instructed by Françoise to ‘scrape’ them, would have them beside her in a basket, her expression as mournful as though she were suffering all the misfortunes of the earth; and the light crowns of azure that girded the asparagus stalks above their tunics of pink were delicately drawn, star by star, as, in the fresco, are the flowers bound around the forehead or tucked into the basket of Virtue at Padua. 
And meanwhile, Françoise would be turning on the spit, as she alone knew how to roast them, one of those chickens which had carried the fragrance of her merits through the far reaches of Combray and which, while she was serving them to us at the table, would make the quality of gentleness predominate in my particular conception of her character, the aroma of that flesh which she knew how to render so unctuous and so tender being for me only the specific perfume of one of her virtues.
But as soon as I called her and she came back to the bedside of Giotto’s Charity, her tears immediately stopped flowing; she could recognize neither the agreeable sensation of pity and tenderness which she knew so well and had so often derived from reading the newspapers, nor any pleasure of the same sort, in the boredom and irritation of having had to get up in the middle of the night for her kitchen-maid; and, at the sight of the same sufferings whose description had made her cry, she now produced nothing more than some bad-tempered mutterings, even some nasty, sarcastic remarks, saying, when she thought we had gone and could not hear her: ‘She had only to stop herself from doing what you do to get this way! I’m certain she enjoyed it well enough! So she needn’t make a fuss now! Anyways, the boy must have to be quite forsaken by the good Lord to want to go with this one. Oh dear! It’s just as they used to say in my poor mother’s patois:
Although, when her grandson had a little cold in the head, she would go off in the night even if she was ill, instead of going to bed, to see if he needed anything, covering four leagues on foot before daybreak in order to be back in time to do her work, this same love of her own people and her desire to ensure the future greatness of her house was expressed, in her policy towards the other servants, by a consistent principle, which was never to let a single one of them become attached to my aunt, whom she took, moreover, a sort of pride in not allowing to be approached by anyone, preferring, when she herself was ill, to get up out of bed in order to give her mistress her Vichy water rather than permit the kitchen-maid access to the bedroom. 
And like the hymenopteron observed by Fabre,33 the burrowing wasp who, so that its young may have fresh meat to eat after its death, summons anatomy in aid of its cruelty and, after capturing a few weevils and spiders, proceeds with a marvellous knowledge and skill to pierce them in the nerve centre on which depends the movement of their legs but not their other life functions, in such a way that the paralysed insect near which it deposits its eggs provides the larvae, when they hatch, with prey that is docile, harmless, incapable of flight or resistance, but not in the least tainted, Françoise found, to serve her abiding desire to make the house intolerable to any other servant, ruses so clever and so merciless that many years later we learned that if we had eaten asparagus almost every day that summer, it was because their smell provoked in the poor kitchen-girl who was given the job of scraping them attacks of asthma so violent that she was obliged in the end to leave.
Alas, we had to change our minds definitively about Legrandin. 
On one of the Sundays following the meeting on the Pont-Vieux after which my father had had to admit his mistake, as Mass was ending and as something so far from holy was entering the church, with the sunlight and the noise from outdoors, that Mme Goupil, Mme Percepied (all the people who, just a short time before, when I arrived a little late, had kept their eyes absorbed in prayer so that I would have thought they did not even see me come in if, at the same time, their feet had not gently pushed back the little kneeling-bench that was blocking my path to my seat) began to converse with us loudly about quite temporal subjects as if we were already in the square, we saw on the blazing threshold of the porch, looking out over the motley tumult of the market, Legrandin being introduced by the husband of that lady with whom we had just recently encountered him to the wife of another large landowner of the area. 
Legrandin’s face expressed an animation, a zeal, that were quite extraordinary; he made a deep bow with a secondary recoil that brought his back sharply up past its starting position and that must have been taught him by the husband of his sister, Mme de Cambremer. 
This rapid straightening caused Legran-din’s bottom, which I had not supposed was so fleshy, to flow back in a sort of ardent muscular wave; and I do not know why that undulation of pure matter, that quite fleshly billow, with no expression of spirituality and whipped into a storm by a fully contemptible alacrity, suddenly awakened in my mind the possibility of a Legrandin quite different from the one we knew. 
This lady asked him to say something to her coachman, and as he went over to the carriage, the imprint of timid and devoted joy which the introduction had set upon his face persisted there still. 
He was smiling, enraptured in a sort of dream, then he hurried back to the lady and, since he was walking more quickly than was his habit, his two shoulders oscillated ridiculously to the right and left, and so entirely did he abandon himself to this, without concern for anything else, that he looked like some inert and mechanical slave of happiness. 
Meanwhile, we were leaving the porch, we were going to pass right by him, he was too well-mannered to turn his head away, but he fastened his gaze, suddenly burdened by a profound reverie, on so distant a point of the horizon that he could not see us and did not have to greet us. 
His face remained ingenuous above his straight and supple jacket that looked as though it had been led astray against its will into detestably splendid surroundings. 
And a polka-dotted Lavallière bow tie tossed by the wind in the Square continued to float in front of Legrandin like the flag of his proud isolation and noble independence. 
Just as we reached the house, Mama realized that we had forgotten the Saint-Honoré cake and asked my father to go back the way we had come, taking me with him, and tell them to bring it immediately. 
Near the church we met Legrandin, who was coming in the opposite direction escorting the same lady to her carriage. 
He passed close to us, did not break off his conversation with his neighbour, and from the corner of his blue eye gave us a little sign that was in some way interior to his eyelid and which, not involving the muscles of his face, could go perfectly unnoticed by the lady he was talking to; but seeking to compensate by intensity of feeling for the somewhat narrow field in which he had circumscribed its expression, in the azure corner assigned to us he set sparkling all the liveliness of a grace that exceeded playfulness, bordered on mischievousness; he over-refined the subtleties of amiability into winks of connivance, insinuations, innuendoes, the mysteries of complicity; and finally exalted his assurances of friendship into protestations of affection, into a declaration of love, illuminating for us alone, at that moment, with a secret languor invisible to the lady, a love-smitten eye in a face of ice.
He had in fact asked my parents the day before to send me to dine with him that evening: ‘Come and keep your old friend company, he had said to me. Like a bouquet sent to us by a traveller from a country to which we will never return, allow me to breathe from the distance of your adolescence those flowers that belong to the springtimes which I too traversed many years ago. Come with the primrose, the monk’s-beard, the buttercup, come with the sedum that makes the bouquet of love in Balzac’s flora,34 come with the flower of Resurrection Day, the Easter-daisy and the garden snowdrop, which is beginning to perfume your great-aunt’s paths even though the last snows dropped by the Easter showers have not yet melted. Come with the glorious silk raiment of the lily worthy of Solomon himself, and with the polychrome enamel of the pansies, but above all come with the breeze still cool from the last frosts, that will open the petals, for the two butterflies that have waited at its door since morning, of the first Jerusalem rose.’
At home they wondered if they ought to send me to have dinner with M. Legrandin even so. 
But my grandmother refused to believe he had been impolite. 
‘Even you admit that he goes about dressed in very simple clothes, hardly those of a man of high society.’ She declared that in any case, and at the very worst, if he had been, it was better to appear not to have noticed. 
In fact, my father himself, though he was the one most irritated by Legrandin’s attitude, may still have harboured a last doubt as to what it meant. 
It was like any attitude or action that reveals a person’s deep and hidden character: it has no connection with anything he has said before, we cannot seek confirmation from the culprit’s testimony for he will not confess; we are reduced to the testimony of our own senses concerning which we wonder, confronting this isolated and incoherent memory, if they were not the victims of an illusion; so that these attitudes, the only ones of any importance, often leave us with some doubts.
And this certainly does not mean that M. Legrandin was not sincere when he ranted against snobs. 
He could not be aware, at least from his own knowledge, that he was one, since we are familiar only with the passions of others, and what we come to know about our own, we have been able to learn only from them. 
Upon ourselves they act only secondarily, by way of our imagination, which substitutes for our primary motives alternative motives that are more seemly. 
It was never Legrandin’s snobbishness that advised him to pay frequent visits to a duchess. 
It would instruct Legrandin’s imagination to make that duchess appear to him as being endowed with all the graces. 
Legrandin would become acquainted with the duchess, filled with esteem for himself because he was yielding to attractions of wit and virtue unknown to vile snobs. 
Only other people were aware that he was one himself; for, because they were incapable of understanding the intermediary work of his imagination, they saw, coupled together, Legrandin’s social activity and its primary cause.
Now we at home no longer had any illusions about M. Legrandin, and our contacts with him became fewer and farther between. 
Mama was infinitely amused each time she caught Legrandin in flagrante delicto in the sin that he would not confess, that he continued to call the sin without forgiveness, snobbishness. 
My father, on the other hand, had trouble accepting Legrandin’s manifestations of disdain with such detachment and good humour; and when, one year, they thought of sending me to spend my summer vacation at Balbec with my grandmother, he said: ‘I absolutely must let Legrandin know that you’ll be going to Balbec, to see if he offers to put you in touch with his sister. He probably doesn’t remember telling us she lives only a mile from there.’ My grandmother, who believed that when staying at a seaside resort one should be on the beach from morning to evening inhaling the salt and that one ought not to know anyone thereabouts because visits and excursions were only so much time taken from the sea air, asked on the contrary that we not speak about our plans to Legrandin, as she could already see his sister, Mme de Cambremer, arriving at the hotel just when we were about to go fishing and forcing us to remain confined indoors entertaining her. 
But Mama laughed at her fears, thinking privately that the danger was not so great, that Legrandin would not be in such a hurry to put us in touch with his sister. 
Yet no one had to mention Balbec to him, it was Legrandin himself who, never suspecting that we had any intention of going to those parts, walked into the trap of his own accord one evening when we met him on the banks of the Vivonne.
– There are very lovely violets and blues in the clouds this evening, are there not, my friend, he said to my father, a blue, especially, more flowery than airy, the blue of a cineraria, which is surprising in the sky. 
And that little pink cloud, too, has it not the tint of some flower, a sweet william or hydrangea? 
Nowhere, perhaps, but on the Channel, between Normandy and Britanny, have I made richer observations of this sort of plant kingdom of the atmosphere. 
There, near Balbec, near those wild areas, there is a little bay, charmingly gentle, where the sunsets of the Auge country, the red and gold sunsets which I do not in the least disdain, let it be said, are characterless, insignificant; but in that damp and mild atmosphere, in the evening, you will see blooming in the space of a few instants celestial bouquets of blue and pink which are incomparable and often last for hours before they fade. 
There are others that lose their blossoms immediately, and then it is even lovelier to see the entire sky strewn with the scattering of their countless petals, sulphur or pink. 
In this bay, which they call Opal Bay, the golden beaches seem gentler still because they are chained like blonde Andromedas36 to those terrible rocks of the nearby coast, to that gloomy shore, famed for the number of its wrecks, where every winter many a vessel is lost to the perils of the sea. 
Balbec! 
The most ancient geological skeleton of our soil, truly Ar-mor, the Sea,37 the land’s end, the accursed region which Anatole France38 – an enchanter whom our little friend here ought to read – has painted so well, under its eternal fogs, like the veritable country of the Cimmerians in the Odyssey.39 
From Balbec especially, where they are already building hotels, superimposing them upon the ancient and charming soil which they cannot change, what a delight it is to go for excursions just a step or two away through regions so primitive and so lovely!
– Oh, do you know someone in Balbec? 
asked my father. 
As it happens, this boy of ours will be spending two months there with his grandmother, and my wife, too, perhaps.
Legrandin, caught unprepared by this question at a moment when he was looking directly at my father, could not turn his eyes away, but fastening them more intensely second by second – and at the same time smiling sadly – to the eyes of his questioner, with an expression of friendliness and frankness and of not being afraid to look him full in the face, he seemed to have gone right through that face as though it had become transparent, and to be seeing at that moment, far beyond and behind it, a bright and colourful cloud that created a mental alibi for him and would allow him to prove that at the moment when he had been asked if he knew someone at Balbec, he was thinking of something else and had not heard the question. 
Usually, such an expression makes the other person say: ‘What are you thinking about?’ But my father, curious, irritated and cruel, said again:
– You know Balbec so well – do you have friends in the area?
In a last desperate effort, Legrandin’s smiling gaze reached its highest degree of tenderness, vagueness, sincerity and distraction, but, no doubt thinking there was nothing else he could do but answer, he said to us:
– I have friends wherever there are companies of trees, wounded but not vanquished, which huddle together with touching obstinacy to implore an inclement and pitiless sky.
– That was not what I meant, interrupted my father, as obstinate as the trees and as pitiless as the sky. 
In case something should happen to my mother-in-law and she needed to feel she was not all alone in an out-of-the-way place, I was asking if you knew anyone there?
– There as everywhere, I know everyone and I know no one, answered Legrandin, who was not going to give in so quickly; I know a great deal about things and very little about people. 
But in that place the very things themselves seem to be people, rare people, delicate in their very essence, disappointed by life. 
Sometimes it is a manor house that you encounter on a cliff, by the side of a road, where it has stopped to point its sorrow towards the still pink evening where the golden moon rises while the returning boats, fluting the dappled water, hoist the flame of evening on their masts and carry its colours; sometimes it is a simple solitary house, rather ugly, its expression shy but romantic, which conceals from all eyes some imperishable secret of happiness and disenchantment. 
This country which is so unreal, he added with a Machiavellian delicacy, this country of pure fiction makes bad reading for a child, and would certainly not be what I would select and recommend for my little friend, already so inclined to sadness, for his heart, already so predisposed. 
A climate of amorous confession or vain regret may be suitable for a disillusioned old man like me, but they are always unhealthy for a temperament as yet unformed. 
Please believe me, he went on insistently, the waters of that bay, already half Breton, may act as a sedative, though a questionable one, on a heart like mine that is no longer undamaged, on a heart for whose wounds there is no longer any compensation. 
They are contra-indicated at your age, my boy. 
Good night, neighbours,’ he added, leaving us with that evasive abruptness which was his habit and, turning back towards us with a doctor’s raised finger, he summed up his advice: ‘No Balbec before the age of fifty, and even then it must depend on the state of the heart,’ he called to us.
Although my father talked to him about this again in our subsequent encounters, torturing him with questions, it was a useless effort: like that erudite crook40 who used to employ, in fabricating false palimpsests, a labour and a scholarship a hundredth part of which would have been enough to guarantee him a more lucrative, but honourable position, M. Legrandin, had we insisted further, would have ended by constructing a whole system of landscape ethics and a celestial geography of Lower Normandy, sooner than admit to us that his own sister lived a mile from Balbec and be obliged to offer us a letter of introduction which would not have been such an object of terror for him had he been absolutely certain – as in fact he should have been given his experience of my grandmother’s character – that we would not have taken advantage of it.
We always returned in good time from our walks so that we could pay a visit to my Aunt Léonie before dinner. 
At the beginning of the season, when the days ended early, when we reached the rue du Saint-Esprit there was still a reflection of the sunset on the windowpanes of the house and a band of crimson deep in the timbers of the Calvary, which was reflected farther off in the pool, a red which, often accompanied by a rather brisk chill, was associated in my mind with the red of the fire over which was roasting the chicken that would allow the poetic pleasure given me by the walk to be succeeded by the pleasure of good eating, warmth and rest. 
But in the summer, when we returned, the sun was not yet setting; and during the visit we made to my Aunt Léonie, its light, lowering and touching the window, had stopped between the great curtains and the curtain-loops, divided, ramified, filtered, and, encrusting the lemon-wood of the chest of drawers with little pieces of gold, illuminated the room obliquely with the delicacy it acquires in the forest undergrowth. 
But on certain very rare days, when we returned, the chest had lost its momentary encrustations long before, when we reached the rue du Saint-Esprit there was no reflection of the sunset spread over the window-panes, and the pool at the foot of the Calvary had lost its red, sometimes it was already the colour of opal and a long ray of moonlight that grew broader and broader and broke over all the wrinkles of the water traversed it entirely. 
Then, as we came near the house, we would see a figure on the doorstep and Mama would say to me:
– Dear me! 
There’s Françoise, watching for us. 
Your aunt must be worried; that means we’re late.
And, without taking the time to remove our things, we would quickly go up to my Aunt Léonie’s room to reassure her and show her that, contrary to what she was already imagining, nothing had happened to us, but that we had gone the ‘Guermantes way’ and, bless us, when one took that walk, my aunt knew very well one could never be sure what time one would be back.
– There, Françoise, said my aunt, what did I tell you? 
Didn’t I say they must have gone the Guermantes way? 
Heavens! 
How hungry they must be! 
And your leg of lamb all dried up after waiting so long. 
What a time to be getting back! 
Well, imagine that, you went the Guermantes way!
– But I thought you knew, Léonie, said Mama. 
I thought Françoise saw us go out the little gate from the kitchen garden.
When we wanted to go in the direction of Méséglise, we would go out (not too early, and even if the sky was overcast, because the walk was not very long and did not take us too far away) as though we were going anywhere at all, through the front door of my aunt’s house on the rue du Saint-Esprit. 
We would be greeted by the gunsmith, we would drop our letters in the box, we would tell Théodore from Françoise, as we passed, that she had no more oil or coffee, and we would leave town by the lane that ran along the white gate of M. Swann’s park. 
Before reaching it, we would meet the smell of his lilacs, coming out to greet the strangers. 
From among the fresh green little hearts of their leaves, the flowers would curiously lift above the gate of the park their tufts of mauve or white feathers, glazed, even in the shade, by the sun in which they had bathed. 
A few, half hidden by the little tiled lodge called the Archers’ House, where the caretaker lived, overtopped its Gothic gable with their pink minarets. 
The Nymphs of Spring would have seemed vulgar compared to these young houris, which preserved within this French garden the pure and vivid tones of Persian miniatures. 
Despite my desire to entwine their supple waists and draw down to me the starry curls of their fragrant heads, we would pass by without stopping because my parents had ceased to visit Tansonville since Swann’s marriage, and, so as not to appear to be looking into the park, instead of taking the lane that goes along its fence and climbs directly up to the fields, we would take another that leads to the same place, but obliquely, and that brought us out too far away. 
One day, my grandfather said to my father:
– Don’t you remember Swann’s telling us yesterday that his wife and daughter were going off to Rheims and that he would take the opportunity to spend a day in Paris? 
We could go along by the park, since the ladies aren’t there; it would make the walk that much shorter for us.
We stopped for a moment in front of the gate. 
Lilac-time was nearly over; a few, still, poured forth in tall mauve chandeliers the delicate bubbles of their flowers, but in many places among the leaves where only a week before they had still been breaking in waves of fragrant foam, a hollow scum now withered, shrunken and dark, dry and without perfume. 
My grandfather pointed out to my father in what respects the look of the place had remained the same, and in what respects it had changed, since the walk he had taken with M. Swann the day of his wife’s death, and he used the occasion to tell the story of that walk one more time.
In front of us, a path bordered with nasturtiums climbed in full sun towards the house. 
To the right, the park extended over level ground. 
Darkened by the shade of the tall trees that surrounded it, an ornamental pond had been dug by Swann’s parents; but even in his most artificial creations, man is still working upon nature; certain places will always impose their own particular empire on their surroundings, sport their immemorial insignia in the middle of a park just as they would have done far from any human intervention, in a solitude which returns to surround them wherever they are, arising from the exigencies of the position they occupy and superimposed on the work of human hands. 
So it was that, at the foot of the path that overlooked the artificial pond, there might be seen in its two rows woven of forget-me-nots and periwinkles, a natural crown, delicate and blue, encircling the chiaroscuro brow of water, and so it was that the sword-lily, bending its blades with a regal abandon, extended over the eupatorium and wet-footed frogbit the ragged fleurs-de-lis, violet and yellow, of its lacustrine sceptre.
But though I remained there in front of the hawthorns breathing in their invisible, unchanging smell, bringing it into the presence of my thoughts, which did not know what to do with it, then losing it, and then finding it again, absorbing myself in the rhythm that tossed their flowers here and there with youthful high spirits and at unexpected intervals like certain intervals in music, they offered me the same charm endlessly and with an inexhaustible profusion, but without letting me study it more deeply, like the melodies you replay a hundred times in succession without descending farther into their secrets. 
I turned away from them for a moment, to accost them again with renewed strength. 
I pursued, all the way on to the embankment behind the hedge that rose steeply towards the fields, some lost poppy, a few cornflowers which had lazily stayed behind, which decorated it here and there with their flowerheads like the border of a tapestry on which appears, thinly scattered, the rustic motif that will dominate the panel; infrequent still, spaced out like the isolated houses that announce the approach of a village, they announced to me the immense expanse where the wheat breaks in waves, where the clouds fleece, and the sight of a single poppy hoisting its red flame to the top of its ropes and whipping it in the wind above its greasy black buoy made my heart pound like the heart of a traveller who spies on a lowland a first beached boat being repaired by a caulker and, before catching sight of it, cries out: ‘The Sea!’
I looked at her, at first with the sort of gaze that is not merely the messenger of the eyes, but a window at which all the senses lean out, anxious and petrified, a gaze that would like to touch the body it is looking at, capture it, take it away and the soul along with it; then, so afraid was I that at any second my grandfather and my father, noticing the girl, would send me off, telling me to run on a little ahead of them, with a second sort of gaze, one that was unconsciously supplicating, that tried to force her to pay attention to me, to know me! 
She cast her eyes forwards and sideways in order to take stock of my grandfather and father, and no doubt the impression she formed of them was that we were absurd, for she turned away and with an indifferent and disdainful look, placed herself at an angle to spare her face from being in their field of vision; and while they, continuing to walk on without noticing her, passed beyond me, she allowed her glances to stream out at full length in my direction, without any particular expression, without appearing to see me, but with a concentration and a secret smile that I could only interpret, according to the notions of good breeding instilled in me, as a sign of insulting contempt; and at the same time her hand sketched an indecent gesture for which, when it was directed in public at a person one did not know, the little dictionary of manners I carried inside me supplied only one meaning, that of intentional insolence.
– Gilberte, come here! 
What are you doing? 
came the piercing, authoritarian cry of a lady in white whom I had not seen, while, at some distance from her, a gentleman dressed in twill whom I did not know stared at me with eyes that started from his head; the girl abruptly stopped smiling, took her spade and went away without turning back towards me, with an air that was docile, inscrutable and sly.
So it was that this name Gilberte passed by close to me, given to me like a talisman that might one day enable me to find her again, this girl whom it had just turned into a person and who, a moment before, had been merely an uncertain image. 
So it passed, spoken over the jasmines and the stocks, as sour and as cool as the drops from the green watering hose; impregnating, colouring the portion of pure air that it had crossed – and that it isolated – with the mystery of the life of the girl it designated for the happy creatures who lived, who travelled in her company; deploying under the pink thicket, at the height of my shoulder, the quintessence of their familiarity, for me so painful, with her and with the unknown territory of her life which I would never be able to enter.
‘Léonie, said my grandfather when we returned, I wish we had had you with us this afternoon. 
You would not recognize Tansonville. 
If I had dared, I would have cut you a branch of those pink hawthorns you used to love so much.
’ And so my grandfather told Aunt Léonie the story of our walk, either to entertain her or because they had not lost all hope of inducing her to go outdoors. 
For at one time she had liked that estate very much, and, too, Swann’s visits had been the last she had received, when she had already closed her door to everyone else. 
And just as, when he now called to inquire after her (she was the only person in our house he still asked to see), she would tell them to answer him that she was tired, but that she would let him come in the next time, so she said, that evening: ‘Yes, some day when it’s nice out, I’ll take the carriage and go as far as the gate of the park.’ She said it sincerely. 
She would have liked to see Swann and Tansonville again; but this desire was enough for what strength remained to her; its fulfilment would have exceeded her strength. 
Sometimes the good weather restored a little of her energy, she would get up, get dressed; the fatigue would set in before she had gone into the other room and she would ask to go back to bed. 
What had begun for her – earlier, merely, than it usually happens – was the great renunciation which comes with old age as it prepares for death, wraps itself in its chrysalis, and which may be observed at the ends of lives that are at all prolonged, even in old lovers who have loved each other the most, even between friends bound by the closest ties of mutual sympathy, who, after a certain year, stop making the necessary journey or outing to see each other, stop writing to each other and know they will not communicate again in this world. 
My aunt must have known perfectly well that she would not see Swann again, that she would never again leave the house, but this final seclusion must have been made fairly comfortable to her for the very reason that, in our eyes, ought to have made it more painful for her: it was that this seclusion was required of her by the diminution in her strength which she could observe each day and which, making each action, each movement, a cause of fatigue, if not pain, in her eyes gave inaction, isolation, silence, the restorative and blessed sweetness of repose.
At symmetrical intervals, in the midst of the inimitable ornamentation of their leaves, which cannot be confused with the leaves of any other fruit tree, the apple trees opened their broad petals of white satin or dangled the timid bouquets of their reddening buds. 
It was on the Méséglise way that I first noticed the round shadow that apple trees make on the sunny earth and those silks of impalpable gold which the sunset weaves obliquely under the leaves, and which I saw my father interrupt with his stick without ever deflecting them.
Sometimes in the afternoon sky the moon would pass white as a cloud, furtive, lustreless, like an actress who does not have to perform yet and who, from the audience, in street clothes, watches the other actors for a moment, making herself inconspicuous, not wanting anyone to pay attention to her. 
I liked finding its image again in paintings and books, but these works of art were quite different – at least during the early years, before Bloch accustomed my eyes and my mind to subtler harmonies – from those in which the moon would seem beautiful to me today and in which I would not have recognized it then. 
It might be, for example, some novel by Saintine,42 some landscape by Gleyre43 in which it stands out distinctly against the sky in the form of a silver sickle, one of those works which were naïvely incomplete, like my own impressions, and which it angered my grandmother’s sisters to see me enjoy. 
They thought that one ought to present to children, and that children showed good taste in enjoying right from the start, those works of art which, once one has reached maturity, one will admire for ever after. 
The fact is that they probably regarded aesthetic merits as material objects which an open eye could not help perceiving, without one’s needing to ripen equivalents of them slowly in one’s own heart.
It was along the Méséglise way, at Montjouvain, a house situated at the edge of a large pond and backed up against a brush-covered hillock, that M. Vinteuil lived. 
And so we often met his daughter on the road driving a cabriolet at top speed. 
One year, she was not alone when we met her, and from then on she was always accompanied by an older friend, a woman who had a bad reputation in the area and who one day moved permanently into Montjouvain. 
People said: ‘Poor M. Vinteuil must be blind with love not to realize what kind of rumours are going around – a man who is shocked by a single remark out of place letting his daughter bring a woman like that to live under his roof. He says she’s a most superior woman, with a good heart, and that she would have had an extraordinary aptitude for music if she had cultivated it. He can be sure she’s not dabbling in music when she’s with his daughter.’ M. Vinteuil did say this; and in fact it is remarkable how a person always inspires admiration for her moral qualities in the family of the person with whom she is having carnal relations. 
Physical love, so unfairly disparaged, compels people to manifest the very smallest particles they possess of goodness, of self-abnegation, so much so that these particles glow even in the eyes of those immediately surrounding them. 
Doctor Percepied, whose loud voice and thick eyebrows permitted him to play as much as he liked the role of villain which his general appearance belied, without in the least compromising his unshakeable and undeserved reputation as a kindly old curmudgeon, was capable of making the curé and everyone else laugh until they cried by saying gruffly: ‘Well, now! It seems young Mlle Vinteuil is making music with her friend. You seem surprised. Now I don’t know. It was old Vinteuil who told me just yesterday. After all, the girl certainly has a right to enjoy her music. It’s not for me to go against a child’s artistic vocation. Nor Vinteuil either, it seems. And then he himself plays music with his daughter’s friend, as well. Heaven help us! There’s certainly a good deal of music-making going on in that establishment. Well, why are you laughing? They play too much music, those people. The other day I met old Vinteuil near the cemetery. He was ready to drop.’
– What a charming man, he said, when Swann had left us, with the same enthusiastic veneration that causes bright and pretty middle-class women to be awed and entranced by a duchess, even if she is ugly and foolish. 
What a charming man! 
How unfortunate that he should have made such an entirely inappropriate marriage!
And then, since even the most sincere people have a streak of hypocrisy in them which makes them put to one side their opinion of a person while they are talking to him, and express it as soon as he is no longer present, my parents deplored Swann’s marriage along with M. Vinteuil in the name of principles and conventions which (by the very fact that they joined him in invoking them, as decent people of the same stamp) they seemed to be implying he had not violated at Montjouvain. 
M. Vinteuil did not send his daughter to Swann’s house. 
And Swann was the first to regret it. 
For each time he left M. Vinteuil, he remembered that for some time now he had had a question to ask him about a person who bore the same name, a relative of his, he believed. 
And this time he had truly promised himself not to forget what he wanted to tell him when M. Vinteuil sent his daughter to Tansonville.
Since the walk along the Méséglise way was the shorter of the two that we took out of Combray and since, because of that, we saved it for uncertain weather, the climate along the Méséglise way was quite rainy and we would never lose sight of the skirt of the Roussainville woods, in the thickness of which we could take cover.
Often the sun would hide behind a storm cloud, distorting its oval, yellowing the edges of the cloud. 
The brilliance though not the brightness would disappear from the countryside where all life seemed suspended, while the little village of Roussainville sculpted its white rooftops in relief against the sky with an overpowering precision and finish. 
A little wind would make a crow fly up and then drop down again in the distance, and against the whitening sky the distant parts of the woods would appear bluer, as though painted in one of those monochromes that decorate the pier glasses of old houses.
But at other times the rain with which we had been threatened by the little hooded monk in the optician’s window44 would begin to fall; the drops of water, like migrating birds which take flight all at the same time, would descend in close ranks from the sky. 
They do not separate at all, they do not wander away during their rapid course, but each one keeps to its place, drawing along the one that comes after it, and the sky is more darkened by them than when the swallows leave. 
We would take refuge in the woods. 
When their flight seemed to be over, a few of them, feebler, slower, would still be arriving. 
But we would come back out of our shelter, because raindrops delight in leafy branches, and, when the earth was already nearly dry again, more than one still lingered to play on the ribs of a leaf and, hanging from the tip, tranquil and sparkling in the sun, would suddenly let go, slip off, and drop from the entire height of the branch on to our nose.
Often, too, we would go and take shelter all crowded in together with the stone saints and patriarchs in the porch of Saint-André-des-Champs. 
How French that church was! 
Above the door, the saints, the knight-kings with fleurs-de-lis in their hands, wedding and funeral scenes, were depicted as they might have been in Françoise’s soul. 
The sculptor had also narrated certain anecdotes involving Aristotle and Virgil just as Françoise in her kitchen readily talked about Saint Louis as if she had known him personally, usually in order to put my grandparents to shame by comparison since they were less ‘fair-minded’. 
One felt that the notions which the medieval artist and the medieval countrywoman (living on into the nineteenth century) had acquired of ancient or Christian history, and which were distinguished by containing as much inaccuracy as simple good-heartedness, were derived not from books, but from a tradition that was at once very old and very direct, uninterrupted, oral, deformed, hardly recognizable, and alive. 
Another Combray character whom I also recognized, potential and prophesied, in the Gothic sculpture of Saint-André-des-Champs, was young Théodore, the delivery boy from Camus’s grocery. 
Françoise, in fact, sensed so clearly that he was a fellow countryman and a contemporary that when my Aunt Léonie was too sick for Françoise by herself to turn her over in bed, or carry her to the armchair, instead of letting the kitchen-maid come up and get into my aunt’s ‘good books’ she would send for Théodore. 
Now this boy, who was taken, and rightly, for such a ne’er-do-well, was so filled with the same spirit that had decorated Saint-André-des-Champs and especially with the feelings of respect that Françoise believed were owed to ‘poor sick folk’, to ‘her poor mistress’, that as he raised my aunt’s head on her pillow he had the same naïve and zealous expression as the little angels in the bas-reliefs, crowding around the fainting Virgin with tapers in their hands, as if the faces of sculpted stone, bare and grey as the woods in winter, were only a deep sleep, a reserve, about to blossom into life again in numberless common faces, reverent and crafty like Théodore’s, illuminated with the redness of a ripe apple. 
No longer affixed to the stone like those little angels, but detached from the porch, of larger than human size, standing on a pedestal as though on a stool that spared her putting her feet on the damp ground, one saint had the full cheeks, the firm breast swelling the folds of the cloth like a cluster of ripe grapes in a bag, the narrow forehead, the short and saucy nose, the deep-set eyes, the able-bodied, impassive and courageous demeanour of the countrywomen of the region. 
This resemblance, which insinuated into the statue a sweetness I had not looked for in it, was often authenticated by some girl from the fields, who, like us, had come to take cover, and whose presence, like the presence of the leaves of a climbing plant that has grown up next to some sculpted leaves, seemed intended to allow us, by confronting it with nature, to judge the truthfulness of the work of art. 
Before us in the distance, a promised or an accursed land, Roussainville, within whose walls I never penetrated, Roussainville was now, when the rain had already stopped for us, continuing to be punished like a biblical village by all the cudgels of the storm, which beat down obliquely on the dwellings of its inhabitants, or had already been pardoned by God the Father, who caused to descend upon it, unequal in length, like the rays of an altar monstrance, the frayed golden shafts of his reappearing sun.
If Françoise then, filled like a poet with a flood of confused thoughts about bereavement, about family memories, excused herself for not knowing how to answer my theories and said: ‘I don’t know how to espress myself,’ I would gloat over that admission with an ironic and brutal common sense worthy of Doctor Percepied; and if she added: ‘All the same, she was your own kith and kindred,46 and there’s a proper respect we owe to our kith and kindred, you know,’ I would shrug my shoulders and say to myself: ‘Look at me, arguing with an illiterate woman who makes such blunders,’ adopting, in judging Françoise, the mean-spirited attitude of men whose behaviour those people who despise them the most when contemplating them impartially are quite capable of adopting, when actually playing one of life’s vulgar scenes.
And it was at that moment, too – because of a countryman who was passing by, who seemed rather cross already and was more so when my umbrella nearly went in his face, and who responded without warmth to my ‘fine weather, isn’t it, perfect for a walk’ – that I learned that the same emotions do not arise simultaneously, in a pre-established order, in all men. 
Later, each time a rather prolonged session of reading had put me in a mood to chat, the friend I was so eager to talk to would himself have just been indulging in the pleasure of conversation and now wanted to be left to read in peace. 
If I had just been thinking tenderly about my parents and making the wisest decisions, those most likely to please them, they would have been employing the same time in discovering some peccadillo I had forgotten, and they would reproach me severely for it just at the moment I bounded towards them to give them a hug.
She was in deep mourning, because her father had died a short time before. 
We had not gone to see her, my mother had not wanted to because of a virtue of hers which alone limited the effects of her goodness: her sense of decency; but she pitied her deeply. 
My mother recalled the sad end of M. Vinteuil’s life, completely absorbed as it was first in giving his daughter the care of a mother or a nursemaid, then in the suffering his daughter had caused him; she could still see the tormented expression on the old man’s face during that last period; she knew he had entirely given up completing the task of transcribing in clean copies all his work of the last few years, insignificant pieces by an old piano teacher, by a former village organist, which we could well imagine had scarcely any value in themselves, but which we did not disdain because they had so much value for him, having been his reason for living before he sacrificed them for his daughter, and which, for the most part not even written down, preserved only in his memory, a few jotted on scattered sheets of paper, unreadable, would remain unknown; my mother thought of that other, even crueller renunciation which had been forced upon M. Vinteuil, the renunciation of a future of decent and respectable happiness for his daughter; when she remembered all this extreme distress on the part of my aunts’ old piano teacher, she was moved by real sorrow and thought with horror of the far more bitter sorrow that Mlle Vinteuil must be feeling, mingled as it was with remorse at having more or less killed her father. 
‘Poor M. Vinteuil, my mother would say, he lived and died for his daughter, without getting any reward for it. Will he get it after his death, and in what form? It could only come to him from her.’
At the back of Mlle Vinteuil’s drawing-room, on the mantelpiece, stood a small portrait of her father which she quickly went to get at the moment when the rattle of a carriage could be heard from the road outside, then she threw herself down on a couch, drew a little table close to her and set the portrait on it, just as M. Vinteuil had once placed beside him the piece that he wanted to play for my parents. 
Soon her friend came in. 
Mlle Vinteuil greeted her without standing up, both hands behind her head, and moved to the end of the sofa as though to make room for her. 
But immediately she felt that by doing this she seemed to be forcing her friend into a position that might be annoying to her. 
She thought her friend might prefer to be some distance away from her on a chair, she thought she had been indiscreet, her tactful heart grew alarmed; moving so that she now occupied all the space on the sofa again she closed her eyes and began yawning to imply that she had only stretched out like that because she was sleepy. 
Despite the crude and overweening familiarity with which she treated her friend, I recognized her father’s obsequious and reticent gestures, his sudden qualms. 
Soon she stood up and pretended to be trying to close the shutters without success.
– But it’s a nuisance, someone will see us,’ answered Mlle Vinteuil.
But she must have guessed that her friend would think she had said these words only to goad her into answering with certain others that she in fact wanted to hear, but that out of discretion she wanted to leave her friend the initiative of uttering. 
And so her face, which I could not see, must have assumed the expression that my grandmother liked so much, as she quickly added:
– When I say see us, I mean see us reading; it’s such a nuisance to think that whatever insignificant thing you may be doing, other eyes are watching you.
Out of an instinctive generosity and an involuntary courtesy she did not speak the premeditated words that she had felt were indispensable to the full realization of her desire. 
And time and again, deep inside her, a timid and supplicant virgin entreated and forced back a rough and swaggering brawler.
– Yes, I’m sure people are watching us at this hour, in this densely populated countryside, her friend said ironically. 
And what if they are? 
she added (thinking she had to give a mischievous, tender wink as she uttered these words, which she recited good-naturedly like a text she knew Mlle Vinteuil liked, in a tone that she tried to make cynical), ‘if someone saw us, so much the better.’
Mlle Vinteuil shuddered and stood up. 
Her scrupulous and sensitive heart did not know what words ought to come to her spontaneously to suit the scene that her senses demanded. 
She searched as far away from her true moral nature as she could to find a language that would fit the depraved girl she wanted to be, but the words she thought that girl would have uttered sincerely seemed false on her own lips. 
And the little she allowed herself to say was said in a stiff tone of voice in which her habitual shyness paralysed her inclinations towards boldness, and was interlarded with: ‘You’re not too cold, are you, you’re not too warm, would you rather be alone and read?’
– Mademoiselle seems to have rather libidinous thoughts this evening, she said at last, probably repeating a phrase she had heard before on her friend’s lips.
Mlle Vinteuil felt her friend plant a kiss in the opening of her crêpe blouse, she gave a little cry, broke free, and they began chasing each other, leaping, fluttering their wide sleeves like wings, and clucking and cheeping like two amorous birds. 
At last Mlle Vinteuil collapsed on the couch, with her friend’s body covering her. 
But the friend had her back turned to the little table on which the old piano teacher’s picture was placed. 
Mlle Vinteuil realized that her friend would not see it if her attention was not drawn to it, and she said to her, as if she had only just noticed it:
– Oh! 
That picture of my father is looking at us. 
I don’t know who could have put it there. 
I’ve told them a dozen times that it doesn’t belong there.
I remembered that these were the same words M. Vinteuil had spoken to my father in connection with the piece of music. 
They were probably in the habit of using the portrait for ritual profanations, because her friend answered her in words which must have been part of her liturgical response:
– Oh, leave him where he is. 
He’s not here to bother us anymore. 
Just think how he would start whining and try to make you put your coat on if he could see you there with the window open, the ugly old monkey.
With words of gentle reproach Mlle Vinteuil answered: ‘Come, come,’ which proved the goodness of her nature, not because they were dictated by the indignation she might have felt at this way of referring to her father (evidently this was a feeling that she had grown used to silencing in herself at these times, with the help of who knows what sophistical reasonings), but because they were a sort of curb that she herself, so as not to seem selfish, was applying to the pleasure that her friend was trying to give her. 
And, too, such smiling forbearance in response to these blasphemies, such a tender, hypocritical reproach, may have appeared to her frank and generous good nature a particularly unspeakable form, a saccharine form of the wickedness she was trying to emulate. 
But she could not resist the attraction of the pleasure she would feel at being treated with such tenderness by a woman so implacable towards a defenceless dead man; she jumped on her friend’s knees, and chastely presented her forehead for a kiss, as a daughter might have done, with the delightful sensation that the two of them were achieving an extreme of cruelty by robbing M. Vinteuil, even in his grave, of his fatherhood. 
Her friend took her head in her hands and set a kiss on her forehead with a docility that came easily to her because of her great affection for Mlle Vinteuil and her desire to bring some amusement into the orphan’s life, which was now so sad.
– Do you know what I would like to do to him – that old horror? 
she said, picking up the portrait.
And she murmured in Mlle Vinteuil’s ear something I could not hear.
– I wouldn’t dare spit on him? 
On that old thing? 
said her friend with deliberate savagery.
I did not hear any more, because Mlle Vinteuil, with a manner that was weary, awkward, fussy, honest, and sad, came and closed the shutters and the window, but now I knew that for all the suffering which M. Vinteuil had endured on his daughter’s account during his lifetime, this was what he had received from her as his reward after his death.
And yet I have thought, since then, that if M. Vinteuil had been able to witness this scene, he still might not have lost his faith in his daughter’s good heart, and perhaps he would not even have been entirely wrong in that. 
It was true that in Mlle Vinteuil’s habits, the appearance of evil was so complete that it would have been hard to find it so perfectly represented in anyone other than a sadist; it is behind the footlights of a popular theatre rather than in the lamplight of an actual country house that one expects to see a girl encouraging her friend to spit on the portrait of a father who lived only for her; and almost nothing else but sadism provides a basis in real life for the aesthetics of melodrama. 
In reality, even when she is not a sadist, a girl might perhaps have failings as cruel as those of Mlle Vinteuil with regard to the memory and wishes of her dead father, but she would not deliberately express them in an act of such rudimentary and naïve symbolism; what was criminal about her behaviour would be more veiled from the eyes of others and even from her own, and she would do evil without admitting it to herself. 
But, beyond appearances, even in Mlle Vinteuil’s heart, the evil, in the beginning at least, was probably not unmixed. 
A sadist of her sort is an artist of evil, something that an entirely bad creature could not be, for then evil would not be exterior to her, it would seem to her quite natural, would not even be distinguishable from her; and as for virtue, memory of the dead and filial tenderness, since she would not be devoutly attached to them she would take no sacrilegious pleasure in profaning them. 
Sadists of Mlle Vinteuil’s sort are beings so purely sentimental, so naturally virtuous that even sensual pleasure seems to them something bad, the privilege of the wicked. 
And when they allow themselves to yield to it for a moment, they are trying to step into the skin of the wicked and to make their partner do so as well, so as to have the illusion, for a moment, of escaping from their scrupulous and tender soul into the inhuman world of pleasure. 
And I understood how much she longed for it when I saw how impossible it was for her to succeed in it. 
At the very moment when she wanted to be so different from her father, what she at once suggested to me were the old piano teacher’s ways of thinking, of speaking. 
Far more than his photograph, what she really desecrated, what she was really using for her pleasures, though it remained between them and her and kept her from enjoying them directly, was the resemblance between her face and his, his own mother’s blue eyes which he had handed down to her like a family jewel, those kind gestures which interposed between Mlle Vinteuil’s vice and herself a style of talking, a mentality that was not made for it and that prevented her from recognizing it as something very different from the numberless obligatory courtesies to which she usually devoted herself. 
It was not evil which gave her the idea of pleasure, which seemed agreeable to her; it was pleasure that seemed to her malign. 
And since each time she indulged in it, it was accompanied by these bad thoughts which were absent the rest of the time from her virtuous soul, she came to see pleasure as something diabolical, to identify it with Evil. 
Perhaps Mlle Vinteuil felt that her friend was not fundamentally bad and was not really sincere when she talked to her in this blasphemous way. 
At least she had the pleasure of kissing her friend’s face with its smiles and glances that might have been feigned but were similar in their depraved and base expression to the smiles and glances of, not a kind, suffering person, but one given to cruelty and pleasure. 
She could imagine for a moment that she was really playing the games that would have been played, with so unnatural a confederate, by a girl who actually had these barbaric feelings towards her father’s memory. 
Perhaps she would not have thought that evil was a state so rare, so extraordinary, so disorienting, and to which it was so restful to emigrate, if she had been able to discern in herself, as in everyone else, that indifference to the sufferings one causes which, whatever other names one gives it, is the terrible and lasting form assumed by cruelty.
If it was fairly simple to go the Méséglise way, it was another matter to go the Guermantes way, because the walk was long and we wanted to be sure what sort of weather we would be having. 
When we seemed to be entering a succession of fine days; when Françoise, desperate because not a single drop of water had fallen on the ‘poor crops’, and seeing only rare white clouds swimming on the calm blue surface of the sky, exclaimed with a moan: ‘Why, they look just like a lot of dog-fishes swimming about up yonder showing us their muzzles! Ah, they never think to make it rain a little for the poor farmers! And then as soon as the wheat is well up, that’s when the rain will begin to fall pit-a-pat pit-a-pat without a break, and think no more of where it’s falling than if ’twas falling on the sea’; when my father had been given the same unvarying favourable responses by both the gardener and the barometer, then we would say over dinner: ‘Tomorrow, if the weather’s the same, we’ll go the Guermantes way.’ We would leave right after lunch by the little garden gate and we would tumble out into the rue des Perchamps, narrow and bent at a sharp angle and filled with different varieties of grasses among which two or three wasps would spend the day botanizing, a street as odd as its name, which it seemed to me was the source of its curious peculiarities and its cantankerous personality, a street one would seek in vain in Combray now, for on its old path the school now stands. 
But in my daydreams (like those architects, pupils of Viollet-le-Duc,47 who, thinking they will find under a Renaissance rood screen or a seventeenth-century altar the traces of a Romanesque choir, restore the whole edifice to the state in which it must have been in the twelfth century) I do not leave one stone of the new structure standing, I break through it and ‘reinstate’ the rue des Perchamps. 
And for these reconstructions I also have more precise data than restorers generally have: a few pictures preserved by my memory, perhaps the last still in existence now, and destined soon to be obliterated, of what Combray was during the time of my childhood; and, because Combray itself drew them in me before disappearing, they are as moving – if one may compare an obscure portrait to those glorious representations of which my grandmother liked to give me reproductions – as those old engravings of the Last Supper or that painting by Gentile Bellini, in which one sees, in a state in which they no longer exist, da Vinci’s masterpiece and the portal of Saint Mark’s.48
In the rue de l’Oiseau we would pass in front of the old hostelry of the Oiseau Flesché, which in the seventeenth century had sometimes seen in its great courtyard the coaches of the Duchesses de Montpensier, de Guermantes and de Montmorency when they had to come to Combray for some dispute with their tenants or to accept their homage. 
We would come to the mall, among whose trees the Saint-Hilaire steeple would appear. 
And I would have liked to be able to sit down and stay there the whole day reading while I listened to the bells; because it was so lovely and tranquil that, when the hour rang, you would have said not that it broke the calm of the day, but that it relieved the day of what it contained and that the steeple, with the indolent, painstaking precision of a person who has nothing else to do, had merely – in order to squeeze out and let fall the few golden drops slowly and naturally amassed there by the heat – pressed at the proper moment the fullness of the silence.
I liked to look at the bottles which the boys put in the Vivonne to catch little fish, and which were filled by the river that in turn surrounded them, so that they became at once a ‘container’ with transparent sides like hardened water and a ‘content’ immersed in a larger container of flowing liquid crystal, and evoked the image of freshness more deliciously and vexingly than they would have done on a table laid for dinner, by showing it only in perpetual flight between the water without consistency in which my hands could not capture it and the glass without fluidity in which my palate could not enjoy it. 
I promised myself I would return there later with some fishing lines; I persuaded them to take out a bit of bread from the provisions for our tea; I threw it into the Vivonne in pellets that seemed enough to provoke a phenomenon of supersaturation, for the water immediately solidified around them in ovoid clusters of starving tadpoles which until then it had no doubt been holding in solution, invisible, on the point of beginning to crystallize.
Soon the course of the Vivonne is obstructed by water plants. 
First they appear singly, like this water-lily, for instance, which was allowed so little rest by the current in the midst of which it was unfortunately placed that, like a mechanically activated ferry-boat, it would approach one bank only to return to the one from which it had come, eternally crossing back and forth again. 
Pushed towards the bank, its peduncle would unfold, lengthen, flow out, reach the extreme limit of its tension at the edge where the current would pick it up again, then the green cord would fold up on itself and bring the poor plant back to what may all the more properly be called its point of departure because it did not stay there a second without starting off from it again in a repetition of the same manoeuvre. 
I would find it again, walk after walk, always in the same situation, reminding me of certain neurasthenics among whose number my grandfather would count my Aunt Léonie, who present year after year the unchanging spectacle of the bizarre habits they believe, each time, they are about to shake off and which they retain for ever; caught in the machinery of their maladies and their manias, the efforts with which they struggle uselessly to abandon them only guarantee the functioning and activate the triggers of their strange, unavoidable and morose regimes. 
This water-lily was the same, and it was also like one of those miserable creatures whose singular torment, repeated indefinitely throughout eternity, aroused the curiosity of Dante, who would have asked the tormented creature himself to recount its cause and its particularities at greater length had Virgil, striding on ahead, not forced him to hurry after immediately, as my parents did me.
But farther on, the current slows down and crosses an estate opened to the public by its owner, who at this spot had made a hobby of creating works of aquatic horticulture, turning the little pools formed by the Vivonne into true flowering gardens of white water-lilies. 
Because the banks were heavily wooded here, the trees’ great shadows gave the water a depth that was usually dark green although sometimes, when we came home on an evening that was calm again after a stormy afternoon, I saw that it was a light, raw blue verging on violet, cloisonné in appearance and Japanese in style. 
Here and there on the surface, the flower of a water-lily blushed like a strawberry, with a scarlet heart, white on its edges. 
Farther off, the more numerous flowers were paler, less smooth, coarser-grained, creased, and grouped by chance in coils so graceful that one thought one saw, floating adrift as after the melancholy dismantling of some gay party, loosened garlands of moss-roses. 
In another place one corner seemed reserved for the various common species, of a tidy white or pink like dame’s-rocket, washed clean like porcelain with housewifely care, while a little farther off, others, pressed against one another in a true floating flower border, suggested garden pansies that had come like butterflies to rest their glossy blue-tinged wings on the transparent obliquity of that watery bed; of that celestial bed as well: for it gave the flowers a soil of a colour more precious, more affecting than the colour of the flowers themselves; and, whether it sparkled beneath the water-lilies in the afternoon in a kaleidoscope of silent, watchful and mobile contentment, or whether towards evening it filled, like some distant port, with the rose and reverie of the sunset, ceaselessly changing so as to remain in harmony, around the more fixed colours of the corollas themselves, with all that is most profound, most fleeting, most mysterious – all that is infinite – in the hour, it seemed to have made them flower in the middle of the sky itself.
As it left this park, the Vivonne flowed freely again. 
How often did I see, and want to imitate, as soon as I should be at liberty to live as I chose, a rower who, having let go of his oars, had lain flat on his back, his head down, in the bottom of his boat, and allowing it to drift, seeing only the sky gliding slowly above him, bore on his face a foretaste of happiness and peace!
We would sit down among the irises at the edge of the water. 
In the holiday sky lingered an idle cloud. 
Now and then, oppressed by boredom, a carp would rise up from the water with an anxious gasp. 
It was time for tea. 
Before starting off again we would remain there on the grass for a long time eating fruit, bread and chocolate, and we would hear, coming all the way to us, horizontal, weakened, but still dense and metallic, the peals of the Saint-Hilaire bell which had not melted into the air they had been traversing for so long and which, ribbed by the successive palpitation of all their waves of sound, vibrated as they brushed over the flowers, at our feet.
Sometimes, at the edge of the water and surrounded by woods, we would come upon what is called a ‘holiday house’,50 isolated and secluded, seeing nothing of the world but the river that bathed its feet. 
A young woman whose pensive face and elegant veils did not belong to this region and who had probably come to ‘bury herself’ here, as the expression has it, to taste the bitter sweetness of knowing that her name, and more importantly the name of the man whose heart she had not been able to hold on to, were unknown here, stood framed in a window that did not allow her to look farther than the boat moored near the door. 
She would absently lift her eyes as she heard, behind the trees along the riverbank, the voices of people passing of whom, even before she glimpsed their faces, she could be certain that they had never known the faithless one nor ever would know him, that nothing in their past bore his imprint, that nothing in their future would have occasion to receive it. 
One sensed that, in her renunciation, she had deliberately withdrawn from places where she might at least have glimpsed the man she loved, in favour of these places which had never seen him. 
And I watched her, as she came back from some walk on a path along which she knew he would not pass, drawing from her resigned hands long gloves of a useless grace.
One day my mother said to me: ‘You’re always talking about Mme de Guermantes. Well, because Doctor Percepied took such good care of her four years ago she’s coming to Combray to attend his daughter’s wedding. You’ll be able to see her at the ceremony.’ It was from Doctor Percepied, in fact, that I had heard the most talk about Mme de Guermantes, and he had even shown us an issue of an illustrated magazine in which she was depicted in the costume she wore to a fancy-dress ball at the home of the Princesse de Léon.
But at the same time, I was trying to apply to this image, which the prominent nose, the piercing eyes pinned into my vision (perhaps because it was they that had first reached it, that had made the first notch in it, at a moment when I had not yet had time to imagine that the woman who appeared before me could be Mme de Guermantes), to this entirely recent, unchangeable image, the idea: ‘It’s Mme de Guermantes,’ without managing to do more than manoeuvre it in front of the image, like two disks separated by a gap. 
But this Mme de Guermantes of whom I had so often dreamed, now that I could see that she actually existed outside of me, acquired from this an even greater power over my imagination, which, paralysed for a moment by this contact with a reality so different from what it had expected, began to react and say to me: ‘Glorious since before Charlemagne, the Guermantes had the right of life and death over their vassals; the Duchesse de Guermantes is a descendant of Geneviève de Brabant. She does not know, nor would she consent to know, any of the people here.’
And – oh, the marvellous independence of the human gaze, tied to the face by a cord so lax, so long, so extensible that it can travel out alone far away from it – while Mme de Guermantes sat in the chapel above the tombs of her dead, her gaze strolled here and there, climbed up the pillars, paused even on me like a ray of sunlight wandering through the nave, but a ray of sunlight which, at the moment I received its caress, seemed to me conscious. 
As for Mme de Guermantes herself, since she remained motionless, sitting there like a mother who does not appear to see the bold pranks and indiscreet enterprises of her children, who play and call out to people she does not know, it was impossible for me to tell if she approved or disapproved, in the idleness of her soul, of the vagabondage of her gaze.
As I observed, as I noted the shape of their spires, the shifting of their lines, the sunlight on their surfaces, I felt that I was not reaching the full depth of my impression, that something was behind that motion, that brightness, something which they seemed at once to contain and conceal.
Without saying to myself that what was hidden behind the steeples of Martinville had to be something analogous to a pretty sentence, since it had appeared to me in the form of words that gave me pleasure, I asked the doctor for a pencil and some paper and I composed, despite the jolts of the carriage, and in order to ease my conscience and yield to my enthusiasm, the following little piece that I have since found again and that I have not had to submit to more than a few changes:
Thus I would often lie until morning thinking back to the time at Combray, to my sad sleepless evenings, to the many days, too, whose image had been restored to me more recently by the taste – what they would have called at Combray the ‘perfume’ – of a cup of tea, and, by an association of memories, to what, many years after leaving that little town, I had learned, about a love affair Swann had had before I was born, with that precision of detail which is sometimes easier to obtain for the lives of people who died centuries ago than for the lives of our best friends, and which seems as impossible as it once seemed impossible to speak from one town to another – as long as we do not know about the expedient by which that impossibility was circumvented. 
All these memories added to one another now formed a single mass, but one could still distinguish between them – between the oldest, and those that were more recent, born of a perfume, and then those that were only memories belonging to another person from whom I had learned them – if not fissures, if not true faults, at least that veining, that variegation of colouring, which in certain rocks, in certain marbles, reveal differences in origin, in age, in ‘formation’.
To belong to the ‘little set’, the ‘little circle’, the ‘little clan’ attached to the Verdurins, one condition was sufficient but necessary: you had to abide tacitly by a Credo one of whose articles was that the young pianist patronized by Mme Verdurin that year, of whom she would say: ‘It ought to be against the law to be able to play Wagner like that!’, ‘was miles above’ both Planté1 and Rubinstein2 and that Doctor Cottard was a better diagnostician than Potain.3 
Any ‘new recruit’ who could not be persuaded by the Verdurins that the soirées given by people who did not come to the Verdurins’ house were as tedious as a rainy day was immediately excluded. 
Because the women were more rebellious in this respect than the men when it came to setting aside their curiosity about society, their desire to find out for themselves how amusing the other salons might be, and because the Verdurins felt that this spirit of investigation and this demon of frivolity could in fact be fatally contagious to the orthodoxy of the little church, they had been led to expel one after another all the ‘faithful’ of the female sex.
Apart from the doctor’s young wife, they were reduced almost exclusively that year (even though Mme Verdurin herself was virtuous and from a respectable bourgeois family, an extremely rich and entirely obscure one with which she had by degrees and of her own accord ceased to have any contact) to a person almost of the demi-monde, Mme de Crécy, whom Mme Verdurin called by her first name, Odette, and declared to be ‘a love’, and to the pianist’s aunt, who must once have been employed as a caretaker; both of them being women ignorant of the world whom, in their naïvety, it had been so easy to delude into believing that the Princesse de Sagan and the Duchesse de Guermantes were obliged to pay certain poor wretches in order to have any guests at their dinners, that if you had offered to get them invitations to the homes of these two great ladies, the former concierge and the cocotte would disdainfully have refused.
The Verdurins did not invite you to dinner: you had, at their house, a ‘place set for you’. 
For the soirée there was no programme. 
The young pianist would play, but only if ‘he fancied’, because they did not force anyone and, as M. Verdurin said: ‘Anything for our friends, long live our pals!’ If the pianist wanted to play the ride from The Valkyrie or the prelude from Tristan,4 Mme Verdurin would protest, not because she did not like that music, but on the contrary because it made too strong an impression on her. 
‘So you want me to have one of my migraines? You know perfectly well the same thing happens every time he plays that. I can count on it! Tomorrow when I try to get up – that’s it, not possible!’ If he did not play, people would chat, and one of the friends, most often their favourite painter at the time, would ‘spin’, as M. Verdurin said, ‘a damn funny tale that would make ’em all shriek with laughter’, especially Mme Verdurin, for such was her habit of taking literally the figurative expressions for the emotions she was feeling that Doctor Cottard (a young novice at the time) would one day have to set her jaw after she dislocated it from laughing too much.
Evening clothes were forbidden because one was ‘among friends’ and also so as not to look like the ‘bores’ whom they avoided like the plague and invited only to the larger soirées, given as rarely as possible and only if it might amuse the painter or help to promote the musician. 
The rest of the time, they were content to play charades, have supper in fancy dress, but only among themselves, not mixing any strangers in with the little ‘clan’.
But as the ‘pals’ had assumed more of a place in Mme Verdurin’s life, the ‘bores’, the ‘pariahs’ were anything that kept the friends away from her, anything that now and then kept them from being free, whether it was the mother of one, the profession of another, the country house or the bad health of a third. 
If Doctor Cottard thought he ought to leave just after he got up from the table in order to return to a patient who was dangerously ill, ‘Who knows, Mme Verdurin would say to him, he might be better off if you don’t go disturbing him again this evening; without you, he’ll have a good night; tomorrow morning early you’ll go there and find him quite recovered.’ At the beginning of December, she would be sick at the thought that the faithful would ‘let them down’ on Christmas Day and the 1st of January. 
The pianist’s aunt insisted that he come to dinner with the family that day at her mother’s home:
– You seem to think your mother might die, Mme Verdurin exclaimed harshly, if you don’t have dinner with her on New Year’s Day the way they do in the provinces!
– Doctor, since you’re such a scholar and free-thinker, may I assume you will be coming on Good Friday just as you would on any other day? 
she said confidently to Cottard the first year, as if she was sure what the answer would be. 
But she trembled as she waited for him to utter it, because if he did not come, she might find herself alone.
– I will come on Good Friday… to say good-bye to you, because we’re going to be spending the Easter holiday in Auvergne.
– In Auvergne? 
You’ll be eaten alive by fleas and other such vermin! 
Much good may it do you!
– If only you had told us, we would have tried to organize something; we could have made the trip together in comfort.
Likewise, if one of the ‘faithful’ had a friend or if one of the ladies had a beau who might make them ‘desert’ occasionally, the Verdurins, who were not afraid of a woman having a lover provided she had him at their house, loved him in their midst and did not prefer his company to theirs, would say: ‘Well, bring your friend along!’ And they would engage him on trial, to see if he was capable of having no secrets from Mme Verdurin, if he was worthy of being enrolled in the ‘little clan’. 
If he was not, the ‘regular’ who had introduced him would be taken aside and helped to break with his friend or his mistress. 
In the opposite case, the ‘newcomer’ would in his turn become one of the faithful. 
And so when, that year, the demi-mondaine told M. Verdurin she had made the acquaintance of a charming man, M. Swann, and insinuated that he would be very pleased to be received at their home, M. Verdurin transmitted the request to his wife then and there. 
(He never formed an opinion until she had formed hers, his particular role being to carry out her wishes, along with those of the faithful, with great and resourceful ingenuity.)
– My dear, Mme de Crécy has something to ask you. 
She would like to introduce one of her friends to you, a M. Swann. 
What do you think?
– Well, now, who could refuse anything to a little angel like that? 
Quiet, no one asked your opinion. 
I tell you you’re an angel.
– Well, if you say so, answered Odette in a mincing tone, and she added: you know I’m not fishing for compliments.5
Of course the ‘little clan’ had no connection to the society in which Swann moved, and true men of fashion would have felt there was little point in enjoying, as he did, an exceptional position only to end up with an introduction to the Verdurins. 
But Swann was so fond of women that once he had come to know more or less all the women in aristocratic circles and they had nothing more to teach him, he had ceased to regard those naturalization papers, almost a patent of nobility, which the Faubourg Saint-Germain had bestowed upon him, except as a sort of negotiable bond, a letter of credit with no value in itself but which allowed him to improvise a status for himself in some little provincial hole or obscure circle of Paris where the daughter of a squire or clerk had struck him as pretty. 
For at such times desire or love would revive in him a feeling of vanity from which he was now quite free in his everyday life (although it was doubtless this feeling that had originally pointed him towards the career as man of fashion in which he had wasted his intellectual gifts in frivolous pleasures and allowed his erudition in matters of art to be used to advise society ladies what pictures to buy and how to decorate their houses), and which made him want to shine, in the eyes of any unknown woman with whom he was infatuated, with an elegance which the name Swann in itself did not imply. 
He wanted this most especially if the unknown woman was in humble circumstances. 
Just as it is not by another man of intelligence that an intelligent man will be afraid of being thought stupid, so it is not by a great lord but by a country bumpkin that a man of fashion will be afraid of seeing his elegance go unappreciated. 
Three-quarters of the mental ingenuity and the lies told out of vanity that have been squandered since the world began by people who in doing so merely diminish themselves have been squandered on inferiors. 
And though Swann was unaffected and casual with a duchess, he trembled at being scorned by a chambermaid, and posed in front of her.
He was not like so many people who, either from laziness or from a resigned sense of the obligation created by their social grandeur to remain attached to a certain mooring, abstain from the pleasures that life offers them outside the worldly situation in which they remain confined until the day of their death, and are content, in the end, to describe as pleasures, for lack of any better, once they have managed to become used to them, the mediocre amusements or bearable tedium it contains. 
Swann never tried to convince himself that the women with whom he spent his time were pretty, but tried instead to spend his time with women he already knew were pretty. 
And these were often women of rather vulgar beauty, for the physical qualities that he looked for without realizing it were the direct opposite of those he admired in the women sculpted or painted by the masters he preferred. 
Depth of expression, melancholy would freeze his senses, which needed only, in order to be awakened, flesh that was healthy, buxom and pink.
If in his travels he met a family whom it would have been more distinguished not to seek to know, but among whom he saw one woman adorned with a charm which he had never experienced before, to ‘stand on his dignity’ and cheat the desire she had inspired, to substitute a different pleasure for the pleasure he might have known with her, by writing to a former mistress to come and join him, would have seemed to him as cowardly an abdication before life, as stupid a renunciation of a new happiness as if, instead of touring the region, he had shut himself up in his room looking at pictures of Paris. 
He did not shut himself up in the edifice of his relationships, but had transformed that edifice, in order to be able to raise it again on the spot wherever he found a woman who pleased him, into one of those collapsible tents of the kind explorers carry with them. 
As for what was not transportable or exchangeable for a new pleasure, he would have given it away for nothing, however enviable it might appear to others. 
How often had his credit with a duchess, built up from the desire she had been accumulating over the years to do something kind for him without having found the occasion, been spent all at once by his sending her an indiscreet message asking for a recommendation by telegraph that would put him in touch, immediately, with one of her stewards whose daughter he had noticed in the country, just as a starving man would barter a diamond for a piece of bread! 
He had even, after the fact, been amused by it, for there existed in him, compensated for by uncommon refinements, a certain boorishness. 
Then, too, he belonged to that category of intelligent men who have lived idle lives and who seek a consolation and perhaps an excuse in the idea that this idleness offers their intelligence objects just as worthy of interest as art or scholarship could offer, that ‘Life’ contains situations more interesting, more novelistic than any novel. 
So he declared, at least, and easily convinced even the sharpest of his society friends, in particular the Baron de Charlus, whom he liked to entertain with tales of the racy adventures he had had, such as when he had met a woman on the railway train and afterwards taken her back home with him, and then discovered that she was the sister of a monarch who at that time held in his hands all the mingled threads of European politics, thus finding he was kept abreast of them in a most agreeable way, or when, through a complex play of circumstances, the choice about to be made by the conclave6 was going to determine whether or not he succeeded in sleeping with somebody’s cook.
And it was not only the brilliant phalanx of virtuous dowagers, generals and academicians with whom he was particularly close, whom Swann compelled with such cynicism to serve him as go-betweens. 
All his friends were used to receiving periodic letters from him in which a word of recommendation or introduction was asked of them with a diplomatic skill that, persisting as it did through his successive love affairs and varying pretexts, revealed, more than moments of indiscretion would have done, a permanent disposition and an identical quest. 
I often asked to hear, many years later when I began to take an interest in his character because of the resemblances it offered to my own in completely different respects, how when he wrote to my grandfather (who was not my grandfather yet, for it was about the time of my birth that Swann’s great love affair began, and it interrupted these habits for a long time), the latter, recognizing his friend’s handwriting on the envelope, would exclaim: ‘It’s Swann, about to ask for something: on guard!’ And either from mistrust, or from the unconsciously diabolical spirit that incites us to offer a thing only to the people who do not want it, my grandparents would issue a blunt refusal to the most easily satisfied requests he addressed to them, as for instance to introduce him to a girl who dined at the house every Sunday, and whom they were obliged, each time Swann mentioned it to them again, to pretend they were no longer seeing, whereas all week long they would wonder who in the world they could invite with her, often finding no one in the end, because they would not ask the one who would have been so happy to come.
Sometimes a certain couple, friends of my grandparents who until then had complained of never seeing Swann, would announce to them with satisfaction and perhaps a little desire to arouse their envy that he had become as charming as could be, that he was never out of their house. 
My grandfather did not want to cloud their pleasure but would look at my grandmother and hum:
A few months later, if my grandfather asked Swann’s new friend: ‘And Swann – do you still see as much of him as ever?’ the face of the man he was talking to would grow long: ‘Never mention his name to me again! – But I thought you were so close…’ For several months he had, for instance, been intimate friends with cousins of my grandmother’s, dining almost every day at their house. 
Suddenly, and without letting them know, he stopped coming. 
They thought he was ill, and my grandmother’s cousin was about to send word asking for news of him, when in the pantry she found a letter from him left inadvertently in the cook’s account book. 
In it he told the woman he was leaving Paris, that he would not be able to continue seeing her. 
She was his mistress, and when he broke it off with her, she was the only one he thought he needed to tell.
But when his mistress of the moment was a woman of rank or at least one whose background was not too humble or her situation too irregular for him to arrange for her to be received in society, then for her he would return to it, but only to the particular orbit in which she moved or into which he had drawn her. 
‘No use depending on Swann for this evening, they would say. Don’t you remember it’s his American’s night at the Opera?’ He would see to it that she was invited to the particularly exclusive salons where he was a constant guest, where he had his weekly dinners, his poker; every evening, after a slight crimp was added to the brush-cut of his red hair, tempering with some gentleness the vivacity of his green eyes, he would choose a flower for his buttonhole and go off to join his mistress at dinner at the home of one or another of the women of his circle; and then, thinking of the admiration and affection which the fashionable people for whom he was the be-all and end-all and whom he was going to find there would lavish on him in the presence of the woman he loved, he would find some fresh charm in this worldly life to which he had become indifferent but whose substance, penetrated and warmly coloured by a flame that had been insinuated into it and flickered there, seemed to him precious and beautiful as soon as he had incorporated into it a new love.
But, while each of these love affairs, or each of these flirtations, had been the more or less complete fulfilment of a dream inspired by the sight of a face or of a body that Swann had spontaneously, without making any effort to do so, found charming, on the contrary when he was introduced to Odette de Crécy one day at the theatre by an old friend of his, who had spoken of her as an entrancing woman with whom he might perhaps have some success, but making her out to be more difficult than she really was in order to appear to have done him a bigger favour by introducing her to him, she had seemed to Swann not without beauty, certainly, but as having a kind of beauty that left him indifferent, that aroused no desire in him, even caused him a sort of physical repulsion, one of those women such as everyone has his own, different for each, who are the opposite of the type our senses crave. 
Her profile was too pronounced for his taste, her skin too delicate, her cheekbones too prominent, her features too pinched. 
Her eyes were lovely, but so large they bent under their own mass, exhausted the rest of her face and always gave her a look of being in ill-health or ill-humour. 
Some time after this introduction at the theatre, she had written to ask if she could see his collections, which interested her so, ‘she, an ignoramus with a taste for pretty things,’ saying that it seemed to her she would understand him better when she had seen him in ‘his home’,10 where she imagined him to be ‘so comfortable with his tea and his books’, though she had not hidden her surprise that he should live in that part of town, which must be so dreary and ‘which was so un-smart for a man who was so very smart himself’. 
And after he had allowed her to come, as she left she had told him how sorry she was to have spent such a short time in a house that she had been so glad to enter, speaking of him as though he meant something more to her than the other people she knew, and seeming to establish between their two selves a sort of romantic bond that had made him smile. 
But at the age, already a little disillusioned, which Swann was approaching, at which one knows how to content oneself with being in love for the pleasure of it without requiring too much reciprocity, this closeness of two hearts, if it is no longer, as it was in one’s earliest youth, the goal towards which love necessarily tends, still remains linked to it by an association of ideas so strong that it may become the cause of love, if it occurs first. 
At an earlier time one dreamed of possessing the heart of the woman with whom one was in love; later, to feel that one possesses a woman’s heart may be enough to make one fall in love with her. 
And so, at an age when it would seem, since what one seeks most of all in love is subjective pleasure, that the enjoyment of a woman’s beauty should play the largest part in it, love may come into being – love of the most physical kind – without there having been, underlying it, any previous desire. 
At this time of life, one has already been wounded many times by love; it no longer evolves solely in accordance with its own unknown and inevitable laws, before our astonished and passive heart. 
We come to its aid, we distort it with memory, with suggestion. 
Recognizing one of its symptoms, we recall and revive the others. 
Since we know its song, engraved in us in its entirety, we do not need a woman to repeat the beginning of it – filled with the admiration that beauty inspires – in order to find out what comes after. 
And if she begins in the middle – where the two hearts come together, where it sings of living only for each other – we are accustomed enough to this music to join our partner right away in the passage where she is waiting for us.
Odette de Crécy came to see Swann again, then visited him more and more often; and no doubt each visit renewed his disappointment at finding himself once again in the presence of that face whose details he had somewhat forgotten in the meantime and which he had not recalled as being either so expressive or, despite her youth, so faded; he felt sorry, as she talked to him, that her considerable beauty was not the sort he would spontaneously have preferred. 
Odette’s face seemed thinner and sharper, in fact, because her forehead and the upper part of her cheeks, those smoother and flatter surfaces, were covered by the masses of hair which women wore at that time drawn forward in fringes, lifted in ‘switches’, spread in stray locks down along the ears; and as for her body, which was admirably formed, it was difficult to discern its continuity (because of the fashions of the period, and even though she was one of the best-dressed women in Paris), because her blouse, jutting out as though over an imaginary paunch and ending abruptly in a point, below which the balloon of the double skirts swelled out, made a woman look as though she were composed of different parts poorly fitted inside one another; because the flounces, the flutes, the vest followed so independently, according to the whimsy of their design or the consistency of their material, the line that led to the knots, the puffs of lace, the perpendicular fringes of jet, or that directed them along the corset, but were in no way attached to the living person, who, depending on whether the architecture of these frills and furbelows approached too closely or moved too far away from her own, was either encased or lost in them.
And as he recalled their conversations this way, as he thought of her this way when he was alone, he was no doubt merely turning over her image among those of many other women in his romantic day-dreams; but if, due to some circumstance (or even perhaps not due to it, since a circumstance that presents itself at the moment when a state of mind, latent until then, comes out into the open may possibly not have influenced it in any way) the image of Odette de Crécy came to absorb all these day-dreams, if these day-dreams were no longer separable from the memory of her, then the imperfection of her body would no longer have any importance, nor would the fact that it might be, more or less than some other body, to Swann’s taste, since, now that it had become the body of the woman he loved, it would be the only one capable of filling him with joy and torment.
As it happened, my grandfather had known – which was more than could be said of any of their current friends – the family of these Verdurins. 
But he had lost all contact with ‘young Verdurin’, as he called him, whom he regarded, somewhat approximately, as having fallen – even while holding on to his many millions – among bohemians and riff-raff. 
One day, he received a letter from Swann asking him if he could put him in touch with the Verdurins: ‘On guard! On guard!’ my grandfather had exclaimed. 
‘This doesn’t surprise me at all; it’s just where Swann was bound to end up. A nice group they are! In the first place, I can’t do what he asks, because I don’t know the gentleman in question any more. And secondly, there must be a woman in it somewhere, and I never get mixed up in such affairs. Well, well! We shall have a rather amusing time of it if Swann falls in with the young Verdurins.’
And after my grandfather returned a negative answer, it was Odette herself who had taken Swann to the Verdurins’.
The Verdurins had had to dinner, on the day Swann made his first appearance there, Doctor and Mme Cottard, the young pianist and his aunt, and the painter who was in their favour at the time, and these were joined during the evening by several other faithful regulars.
Doctor Cottard was never quite certain of the tone in which he ought to answer someone, whether the person addressing him wanted to make a joke or was serious. 
And just in case, he would add to each of his facial expressions the offer of a conditional and tentative smile whose expectant shrewdness would exculpate him from the reproach of naïvety, if the remark that had been made to him was found to have been facetious. 
But since, so as to respond to the opposite hypothesis, he did not dare allow that smile to declare itself distinctly on his face, one saw an uncertainty perpetually floating upon it in which could be read the question he did not dare ask: ‘Are you saying this in earnest?’ He was no more sure how he ought to behave in the street, and even in life generally, than in a drawing-room, and he could be seen greeting passers-by, carriages and any minor event that occurred with the same ironic smile that removed all impropriety from his attitude in advance, since he was proving that if the attitude was not a fashionable one he was well aware of it and that if he had adopted it, it was as a joke.
On all points, however, where a direct question seemed to him permissible, the doctor did not fail to endeavour to reduce the field of his doubts and complete his education.
And so, acting on the advice given him by a foresightful mother when he left her province, he never let pass either an expression or a proper name that was unknown to him, without trying to acquire documentation about it.
In the case of expressions, he was insatiable for enlightenment, because, sometimes assuming they had a more precise meaning than they had, he wanted to know exactly what was meant by those he heard used most often: the bloom of youth, blue blood, a fast life, the hour of reckoning, to be a prince of refinement, to give carte blanche, to be nonplussed, etc., and in which specific cases he in his turn could introduce them into his conversation. 
If there were none, he would substitute puns he had learned. 
As for new names of people mentioned in his presence, he contented himself merely with repeating them in a questioning tone that he thought sufficient to procure him explanations without his appearing to ask for them.
Since he completely lacked the critical faculty which he thought he exercised on everything, that refinement of politeness which consists in declaring to a person to whom you are doing a favour, without however expecting to be believed, that you are in fact indebted to him, was a waste of time with the doctor, who took everything literally. 
Whatever Mme Verdurin’s blindness with respect to him, she had in the end, while continuing to find him very subtle, been annoyed to see that, when she invited him to share a box near the stage for a performance by Sarah Bernhardt, saying to him, to be especially gracious: ‘It was too kind of you to come, Doctor, especially since I’m sure you’ve already heard Sarah Bernhardt many times, and we may also be too close to the stage,’ Doctor Cottard, who had entered the box with a smile that was waiting to become more pronounced or to disappear as soon as some authoritative person informed him as to the quality of the entertainment, answered her: ‘It’s true that we’re much too close and one begins to tire of Sarah Bernhardt. But you expressed a desire that I should come. And your desire is my command. I am only too happy to do you this small service. Is there anything one would not do in order to please you, you’re so good!’ And he added: ‘Sarah Bernhardt – she is in fact the Golden Voice, isn’t she? And they often write that she sets the stage on fire. That’s an odd expression, isn’t it?’ in hope of commentaries which were not forthcoming.
‘You know, Mme Verdurin had said to her husband, I believe we’re steering the wrong course when we belittle our gifts to the doctor out of modesty. 
He’s a man of science, out of touch with the practical side of life, he has no idea of the value of things and relies on what we tell him. 
– I hadn’t dared say anything to you, but I had noticed,’ answered M. Verdurin. 
And the following New Year’s Day, instead of sending Doctor Cottard a three-thousand-franc ruby, remarking that it was only a trifle, M. Verdurin paid three hundred francs for an artificial stone, implying that it would be hard to find one as beautiful.
When Mme Verdurin had announced that they would be having M. Swann at the soirée, ‘Swann?’ the doctor had exclaimed in a tone of voice made rough by surprise, for the slightest piece of news always caught him more off guard than anyone else, though this was a man who believed he was perpetually prepared for anything. 
And seeing that no one answered him, ‘Swann? Who’s this Swann?’ he roared, filled with an anxiety that suddenly abated when Mme Verdurin said: ‘Why, the friend Odette told us about. – Ah, good, good! That’s all right then,’ answered the doctor, pacified. 
As for the painter, he was delighted by the introduction of Swann to Mme Verdurin’s, because he assumed Swann was in love with Odette and he liked to encourage love affairs. 
‘There’s nothing I enjoy more than arranging a marriage, he confided in Doctor Cottard’s ear. I’ve already managed a good many, even between women!’
By telling the Verdurins that Swann was very ‘smart’, Odette had awoken in them the fear that he would be a ‘bore’. 
However, he made an excellent impression, of which, without their knowing it, his association with fashionable society was one of the indirect causes. 
He had, in fact, over men who have never mixed in high society, even intelligent men, one of the superior qualities of those who have had some experience of it, which is that they no longer transfigure it out of the desire or the horror it inspires in their imagination, they consider it unimportant. 
Their friendliness, disassociated from any snobbery and from a fear of seeming too friendly, quite independent, has that ease, that grace characteristic of the motions of people whose supple limbs perform exactly what they want, without any indiscreet or awkward participation of the rest of the body. 
The simple elementary gymnastics of a man of the world extending his hand with good grace to the unknown young man who is being introduced to him, and bowing with reserve to the ambassador to whom he is being introduced, had in the end passed, without his being aware of it, into Swann’s whole social attitude, so that towards people of a social circle inferior to his like the Verdurins and their friends he instinctively displayed a marked attention, permitted himself to make advances, from which, according to them, a bore would have refrained. 
He had a moment of coldness only with Cottard: seeing the doctor wink at him and smile ambiguously before they had spoken to each other (a dumb-show that Cottard called ‘wait-and-see’), Swann thought the doctor probably recognized him from a previous encounter in some house of pleasure, even though he himself went to such places very seldom, having never lived in a world of debauchery. 
Finding the allusion in bad taste, especially in the presence of Odette, who might receive a poor impression of him from it, he assumed an icy manner. 
But when he learned that the lady standing near him was Mme Cottard, he thought that such a young husband would not have tried to allude to amusements of that sort in front of his wife; and he ceased to give the doctor’s knowing look the meaning he had feared. 
The painter immediately invited Swann to come to his studio with Odette; Swann thought he was nice. 
‘Perhaps he’ll favour you more than he has me, said Mme Verdurin in a tone of mock resentment, perhaps he’ll show you Cottard’s portrait’ (she had commissioned it from the painter). 
‘Make sure, “Monsieur” Biche,’ she reminded the painter, whom it was a sacred joke to address as Monsieur, ‘to capture that nice look in his eye, that subtle, amusing little way he has of looking at you. As you know, what I want most of all is his smile; what I asked you for was a portrait of his smile.’ And since the phrase seemed to her noteworthy, she repeated it very loudly to make sure a number of guests heard it, and even, using some vague pretext, summoned a few of them over to her first. 
Swann asked to be introduced to everyone, even to an old friend of the Verdurins, Saniette, whose shyness, simplicity and good nature had lost him all the esteem he had won by his skill as an archivist, his substantial fortune and the distinguished family he came from. 
When he talked, there was a sort of mushy sound to his pronunciation that was charming because one sensed that it betrayed not so much an impediment in his speech as a quality of his soul, a sort of vestige of early childhood innocence that he had never lost. 
Each consonant he could not pronounce appeared to be another instance of a hardness of which he was incapable. 
In asking to be introduced to M. Saniette, Swann appeared to Mme Verdurin to be reversing roles (to the degree that in response, she said, insisting on the difference: ‘Monsieur Swann, would you have the goodness to allow me to introduce to you our friend Saniette’), but aroused in Saniette a warm feeling of congeniality which the Verdurins, however, never revealed to Swann, for Saniette irritated them a little, and they were not anxious to make friends for him. 
But, on the other hand, Swann touched them infinitely by believing he ought to ask immediately to be introduced to the pianist’s aunt. 
She was in a black dress, as always, because she thought one always looked nice in black and that it was most distinguished, and her face was extremely red, as it always was after she had just eaten. 
She bowed to Swann with respect, but straightened with majesty. 
Because she had no education and was afraid of making mistakes in grammar, she deliberately pronounced things in a garbled way, thinking that if she made a blunder it would be fogged over by such indefiniteness that no one would be able to make it out with any certainty, so that her conversation was reduced to an indistinct hawking, from which emerged now and then the few vocables of which she felt confident. 
Swann thought he could poke a little fun at her when he was talking to M. Verdurin, but the latter was offended.
‘She’s such an excellent woman, he answered. 
I grant you she’s not brilliant; but I assure you she can be most agreeable when you talk to her on your own. 
– I don’t doubt it, Swann hastened to concede. 
I meant to say she did not seem to me “eminent”, he added, isolating the adjective, and really that’s rather a compliment! 
– Well, now, said M. Verdurin, this will surprise you: she writes charmingly. 
You’ve never heard her nephew? 
He’s wonderful, isn’t he, Doctor? 
Would you like me to ask him to play something, Monsieur Swann? 
– Why, it would be a joy…’ Swann was beginning to answer, when the doctor interrupted him with a mocking look. 
In fact, having acquired the notion that in conversation, to be emphatic, to employ formal expressions was old-fashioned, as soon as he heard a solemn word used seriously, as the word ‘joy’ had just been used, he thought the person who had uttered it had just been guilty of pomposity. 
And if, in addition, the word happened to occur in what he called an old cliché, however current it might be in other respects, the doctor would assume that the sentence that had been begun was ridiculous and would finish it ironically using the platitude he seemed to be accusing the speaker of having wanted to deploy, although the latter had never thought of it.
– A joy for ever! he cried mischievously, raising his arms for emphasis.
– What are those good people laughing about! 
You don’t seem to be having a bad time over there in your corner, cried Mme Verdurin. 
I hope you don’t think I’m enjoying myself here in disgrace all by myself, she added in a tone of childish chagrin.
Mme Verdurin was sitting on a high Swedish chair of waxed pine, which she had been given by a violinist from that country and which she had kept, though it looked rather like a stool and was at odds with the beautiful old furniture that she had, but she insisted on keeping in evidence the gifts which the faithful regulars were in the habit of giving her from time to time, so that the givers would have the pleasure of spotting them when they came. 
And so she tried to persuade them to give her nothing but flowers and sweets, which are at least perishable; but she was not successful, and her home contained a collection of foot-warmers, cushions, clocks, screens, barometers and urns, in an accumulation of useless, repetitive and incongruous offerings.
From this elevated spot she participated energetically in the conversation of the faithful and enjoyed their banter, but after the accident involving her jaw, she had ceased to take pains to explode in true laughter and indulged, instead, in a conventional pantomime that signified, without fatigue or risk for her, that she was laughing to the point of tears. 
At the mildest remark fired off by a regular against a bore or against a former regular who had been flung back into the camp of the bores – and to the greatest despair of M. Verdurin, who for a long time had had pretensions of being as affable as his wife, but who, when laughing in earnest, would soon get out of breath and so had been outdistanced and defeated by this ruse of incessant and fictive hilarity – she would utter a little cry, tightly close her bird-like eyes, already slightly dimmed by leucoma, and abruptly, as if she had only just had time to avoid some indecent spectacle or avert a fatal blow, plunging her face in her hands, which covered it and hid it completely, would appear to be doing her best to suppress, to annihilate a fit of laughter which, had she given way to it, would have caused her to faint. 
So, dazed by the gaiety of the faithful, drunk with good-fellowship, scandal and approbation, Mme Verdurin, poised on her perch, like a bird whose seed-cake has been soaked in warm wine, sobbed with affability.
Meanwhile, M. Verdurin, after asking Swann’s permission to light his pipe (‘we don’t stand on ceremony here, we’re among friends’), begged the young musician to sit down at the piano.
– Now don’t bother him, he didn’t come here to be tormented, exclaimed Mme Verdurin, I won’t have him tormented!
– But why on earth should it bother him? 
said M. Verdurin. 
Perhaps M. Swann doesn’t know the Sonata in F sharp which we’ve discovered. 
He’ll play the piano arrangement for us.
– Oh, no, no, not my sonata! cried Mme Verdurin. 
I don’t want to have to cry until I get a head cold and neuralgia in my face, the way I did last time. 
Thanks for your offer, but I don’t intend to repeat that performance. 
You’re so kind, all of you; it’s easy to see you’re not the ones who will have to stay in bed for a week!
This little scene, which was re-enacted each time the pianist prepared to play, enchanted her friends as much as if it had been brand new, because it was proof of the ‘Patronne’s’13 charming originality and sensitivity to music. 
Those who were near her signalled to those farther away who were smoking or playing cards to come closer, that something was happening, saying to them, as they do in the Reichstag at interesting moments: ‘Listen, listen.’ And the next day they would tell those who had not been able to be there how sorry they were, reporting that the scene had been even more entertaining than usual.
– Well, all right then, said M. Verdurin. 
He’ll just play the andante.
– Just the andante! 
What are you saying! exclaimed Mme Verdurin. 
It’s precisely the andante that completely paralyses me. 
Listen to the Patron! 
He’s really marvellous! 
It’s as if he said: in the Ninth we’ll just hear the finale, or in The Meistersingers14 we’ll just hear the overture.
The doctor, however, urged Mme Verdurin to let the pianist play, not because he thought the troubling effects the music had on her were feigned – he recognized certain neurasthenic symptoms in them – but from a habit which many doctors have, of immediately relaxing the severity of their prescriptions when something is involved that seems much more important to them, like some social gathering at which they are present and in which the person they are advising for once to forget his dyspepsia or his flu is an essential factor.
– You won’t become ill this time, you’ll see, he told her, trying to hypnotize her with his eyes. 
And if you do, we’ll look after you.
– Really and truly? 
answered Mme Verdurin, as if the hope of such a favour left her no alternative but to capitulate. 
Perhaps also, because she said she would be ill, there were times when she did not recall that it was a lie and took on the character of an ill person. 
For invalids, tired of always having to make the rarity of their attacks dependent on their prudence, like to indulge in the belief that they can with impunity do all of the things that give them pleasure and usually hurt them, as long as they put themselves in the hands of a powerful person who, without their having to take any pains, with a word or a pill will put them back on their feet.
Odette had gone to sit on a tapestry-covered couch near the piano:
– You know I have my own little spot, she said to Mme Verdurin. 
The latter, seeing Swann on a chair, made him get up:
– You’re not very comfortable there: now go and sit next to Odette. 
You’ll make room for M. Swann there, won’t you, Odette?
– What a pretty Beauvais, said Swann before he sat down, trying to be pleasant.
– Ah, if Madame Verdurin begins fondling the bronzes, we won’t hear any music tonight, said the painter.
– You be quiet. 
You’re a rascal. 
In fact, she said, turning to Swann, we women are forbidden to do things far less voluptuous than this. 
But no flesh can compare to it! 
When M. Verdurin did me the honour of being jealous of me – come now, be polite at least, don’t say you never were…
– But I said absolutely nothing. 
Doctor, be my witness: did I say anything?
Swann was feeling the bronzes to be polite and did not dare stop right away.
– Come, you can caress them later; now you’re the one who’s going to be caressed. 
Your ears are going to be caressed; you’ll like that, I think; here’s the dear young man who’ll be doing it.
Now after the pianist had played, Swann was even friendlier to him than to the others who were present. 
This is why:
The year before, at a soirée, he had heard a piece of music performed on the piano and violin. 
At first, he had experienced only the physical quality of the sounds secreted by the instruments. 
And it had been a keen pleasure when, below the little line of the violin, slender, unyielding, compact and commanding, he had seen the mass of the piano part all at once struggling to rise in a liquid swell, multiform, undivided, smooth and colliding like the purple tumult of the waves when the moonlight charms them and lowers their pitch by half a tone. 
But at a certain moment, without being able to distinguish an outline clearly, or give a name to what was pleasing him, suddenly charmed, he had tried to gather up and hold on to the phrase or harmony – he himself did not know which – that was passing by him and that had opened his soul so much wider, the way the smells of certain roses circulating in the damp evening air have the property of dilating our nostrils. 
Maybe it was because of his ignorance of music that he had been capable of receiving so confused an impression, the kind of impression that is, however, perhaps the only one which is purely musical, immaterial, entirely original, irreducible to any other order of impression. 
An impression of this kind, is for an instant, so to speak, sine materia. 
No doubt the notes we hear then tend already, depending on their loudness and their quantity, to spread out before our eyes over surfaces of varying dimensions, to trace arabesques, to give us sensations of breadth, tenuousness, stability, whimsy. 
But the notes vanish before these sensations are sufficiently formed in us not to be submerged by those already excited by the succeeding or even simultaneous notes. 
And this impression would continue to envelop with its liquidity and its ‘mellowness’ the motifs that at times emerge from it, barely discernible, immediately to dive under and disappear, known only by the particular pleasure they give, impossible to describe, recall, name, ineffable – if memory, like a labourer working to put down lasting foundations in the midst of the waves, by fabricating for us facsimiles of these fleeting phrases, did not allow us to compare them to those that follow them and to differentiate them. 
And so, scarcely had the delicious sensation which Swann had felt died away than his memory at once furnished him with a transcription that was summary and temporary but at which he could glance while the piece continued, so that already, when the same impression suddenly returned, it was no longer impossible to grasp. 
He could picture to himself its extent, its symmetrical groupings, its notation, its expressive value; he had before him this thing which is no longer pure music, which is drawing, architecture, thought, and which allows us to recall the music. 
This time he had clearly distinguished one phrase rising for a few moments above the waves of sound. 
It had immediately proposed to him particular sensual pleasures which he had never imagined before hearing it, which he felt could be introduced to him by nothing else, and he had experienced for it something like an unfamiliar love.
With a slow rhythm it led him first here, then there, then elsewhere, towards a happiness that was noble, unintelligible and precise. 
And then suddenly, having reached a point from which he was preparing to follow it, after an instant’s pause, abruptly it changed direction, and with a new movement, quicker, slighter, more melancholy, incessant and sweet, it carried him off with it towards unfamiliar vistas. 
Then it disappeared. 
He wished passionately to see it a third time. 
And it did indeed reappear but without speaking to him more clearly, bringing him, indeed, a sensual pleasure that was less profound. 
But once he was back at home he needed it, he was like a man into whose life a woman he has glimpsed for only a moment as she passed by has introduced the image of a new sort of a beauty that increases the value of his own sensibility, without his even knowing if he will ever see this woman again whom he loves already and of whom he knows nothing, not even her name.
It even seemed, for a moment, that this love for a phrase of music would have to open in Swann the possibility of a sort of rejuvenation. 
He had for so long given up directing his life towards an ideal goal and limited it to the pursuit of everyday satisfactions that he believed, without ever saying so formally to himself, that this would not change as long as he lived; much worse, since his mind no longer entertained any lofty ideas, he had ceased to believe in their reality, though without being able to deny it altogether. 
Thus he had acquired the habit of taking refuge in unimportant thoughts that allowed him to ignore the fundamental essence of things. 
Just as he did not ask himself if it would have been better for him not to go into society, but on the other hand knew quite certainly that if he had accepted an invitation he ought to go and that if he did not pay a call afterwards he must at least leave cards, so in his conversation he endeavoured never to express with any warmth a personal opinion about things, but to furnish material details that had some sort of value in themselves and allowed him not to show his real capacities. 
He was extremely precise when it came to the recipe for a dish, the date of a painter’s birth or death, the nomenclature of his works. 
Now and then, despite everything, he went so far as to utter a judgment on a work, on someone’s interpretation of life, but he would then give his remarks an ironic tone, as if he did not entirely subscribe to what he was saying. 
Now, like certain confirmed invalids in whom, suddenly, a country they have arrived in, a different diet, sometimes a spontaneous and mysterious organic development seem to bring on such a regression of their ailment that they begin to envisage the unhoped-for possibility of belatedly starting a completely different life, Swann found within himself, in the recollection of the phrase he had heard, in certain sonatas he asked people to play for him, to see if he would not discover it in them, the presence of one of those invisible realities in which he had ceased to believe and to which, as if the music had had a sort of sympathetic influence on the moral dryness from which he suffered, he felt in himself once again the desire and almost the strength to devote his life. 
But, since he had not succeeded in finding out who had composed the work he had heard, he had not been able to acquire it for himself and had ended by forgetting it. 
True, during the week he had encountered several people who had been with him at that party and he had asked them about it; but many had arrived after the music or left before; some were indeed there while it was performed but had gone into the other drawing-room to talk, and others, who had stayed to listen, had heard no more of it than had the first group. 
As for the master and mistress of the house, they knew it was a recent work which the musicians whom they had hired had asked to play; since the latter had gone off on a tour, Swann could not find out anything more. 
He had many friends who were musicians, but though he recalled the special and inexpressible pleasure the phrase had given him, and saw before his eyes the shapes it outlined, he was not able to sing it for them. 
Then he stopped thinking about it.
Now, scarcely a few minutes after the young pianist had begun playing at Mme Verdurin’s, suddenly, after a high note held for a long time through two measures, he saw it approaching, escaping from under that prolonged sonority stretched like a curtain of sound hiding the mystery of its incubation, he recognized it, secret, murmuring and divided, the airy and redolent phrase that he loved. 
And it was so particular, it had a charm so individual, which no other charm could have replaced, that Swann felt as though he had encountered in a friend’s drawing-room a person whom he had admired in the street and despaired of ever finding again. 
In the end, diligent, purposeful, it receded through the ramifications of its perfume, leaving on Swann’s face the reflection of its smile. 
But now he could ask the name of his stranger (they told him it was the andante from the Sonata for piano and violin by Vinteuil), he possessed it, he could have it in his house as often as he liked, try to learn its language and its secret.
And so when the pianist had finished, Swann went up to him to express a gratitude whose warmth was very pleasing to Mme Verdurin.
– He’s a charmer, isn’t he? 
she said to Swann. 
You might say he knows a thing or two about that sonata, the little devil. 
You didn’t know the piano could achieve such things. 
It’s everything – except a piano! 
My word! 
I’m startled by it every time; I think I’m hearing an orchestra. 
Though it’s even more beautiful than an orchestra, more complete.
The young pianist bowed, and with a smile, stressing the words as if he were making a witty remark:
And while Mme Verdurin was saying to her husband: ‘Come, give him some orangeade, he certainly deserves it,’ Swann was describing to Odette how he had been in love with that little phrase. 
When Mme Verdurin said, from a little way off: ‘Well now, it seems to me someone is saying sweet things to you, Odette,’ she answered: ‘Yes, very sweet,’ and Swann found her simplicity delightful. 
Meanwhile, he was asking for information about Vinteuil, about his work, about the period of his life in which he had composed this sonata, about what the little phrase could have meant to him, this was what he would have liked to know most of all.
But all these people who professed to admire that musician (when Swann had said that his sonata was truly beautiful, Mme Verdurin had exclaimed: ‘I should say it’s beautiful! But one simply doesn’t admit that one does not know Vinteuil’s sonata, one is not allowed not to know it,’ and the painter had added: ‘Ah, yes! It’s a work of genius, isn’t it? It may not be what you would call “obvious” or “popular”, is it? But it makes a very great impression on us artists’), these people seemed never to have asked themselves these questions, for they were incapable of answering them.
In answer to one or two particular remarks that Swann made about his favourite phrase, Mme Verdurin went so far as to say:
– Well now, that’s funny, I never paid any attention. 
I’ll tell you, I don’t very much enjoy nit-picking or discussing fine points; we don’t waste our time splitting hairs here, it’s not that kind of a house, while Doctor Cottard watched her with speechless admiration and zealous studiousness as she frolicked in this billow of stock expressions. 
He and Mme Cottard, however, with a kind of good sense which is also possessed by certain people from humble backgrounds, carefully refrained from offering an opinion or feigning admiration for a sort of music which they confessed to each other, once they were back home, they did not understand any more than the painting of ‘Monsieur Biche’. 
Since, of the charm, the grace, the forms of nature, the public knows only what it has absorbed from the clichés of an art slowly assimilated, and since an original artist begins by rejecting these clichés, M. and Mme Cottard, being in this sense typical of the public, found neither in Vinteuil’s sonata, nor in the painter’s portraits, what for them created the harmony of music and the beauty of painting. 
It seemed to them when the pianist played the sonata that he was randomly attaching to the piano notes that were not in fact connected to the forms they were used to, and that the painter was randomly hurling colours on to his canvases. 
When they were able to recognize a form in these canvases, they found it heavy and vulgarized (that is, lacking the elegance of the school of painting through which they viewed all living creatures, even in the street), and lacking truth, as if Monsieur Biche did not know how a shoulder was constructed or that women do not have lavender hair.
However, when the regulars had dispersed, the doctor felt this was a favourable opportunity, and while Mme Verdurin was saying a last word about Vinteuil’s sonata, like a beginning swimmer who throws himself into the water in order to learn but chooses a moment when there are not too many people to see him, he exclaimed with sudden determination:
– Now, this is what one calls a musician di primo cartello!
15
Swann learned only that the recent appearance of Vinteuil’s sonata had made a strong impression on a school of very advanced tendencies, but was entirely unknown to the larger public.
– I know someone quite well named Vinteuil, said Swann, thinking of the piano-teacher who had taught my grandmother’s sisters.
– Oh, no! 
Swann answered, laughing. 
If you had ever spent just a minute or two with him, you wouldn’t ask.
– Then, to ask the question is to answer it? 
said the doctor.
– But he could be a relative, Swann went on. 
That would be rather sad, but the fact is, a man of genius can be cousin to an old fool. 
If this is so, I confess I would submit to any kind of torture to get the old fool to introduce me to the composer of that sonata: starting with the torture of associating with the old fool, which would be frightful.
The painter knew that Vinteuil was very ill at the moment and that Doctor Potain was afraid he would not be able to save him.
– What! cried Mme Verdurin. 
Are there people who still go to Potain?
– Ah, Madame Verdurin! said Cottard, in a tone of witty repartee, you forget that you’re talking about one of my colleagues, I should say one of my teachers.
The painter had heard that Vinteuil was threatened with mental illness. 
And he declared that one could perceive it in certain passages of his sonata. 
Swann did not find this comment absurd, but it bothered him; for since a pure work of music contains none of the logical relationships whose alteration in language reveals madness, madness recognized in a sonata seemed to him something as mysterious as the madness of a bitch, the madness of a horse, though these can indeed be observed.
– Don’t upset me with talk about your “teachers”. 
You know ten times as much as he does, Mme Verdurin answered Doctor Cottard, in the tone of a person who has the courage of her convictions and stoutly holds her own against those who are not of the same opinion. 
At least you don’t kill your patients!
– But Madame, he belongs to the Academy,16 replied the doctor ironically. 
If a patient would rather die by the hand of one of the princes of science… It’s much more stylish to be able to say: ‘I’m being treated by Potain.’
– Ah! 
It’s more stylish? 
said Mme Verdurin. 
So there’s such a thing as style in illness now? 
I wasn’t aware of that… How funny you are! she exclaimed suddenly, dropping her face in her hands. 
And I was such a silly fool, talking about it seriously without seeing that you were pulling my leg.
As for M. Verdurin, finding it rather a strain to force a laugh over such a trifle, he contented himself with drawing on his pipe, musing sadly that he would never be able to rival his wife in a contest of amiability.
– You know, we like your friend very much, said Mme Verdurin to Odette when the latter was wishing her a good night. 
He’s so unaffected, he’s so charming; if all the friends you think of introducing to us are like him, you may certainly bring them.
M. Verdurin pointed out that Swann had not, however, appreciated the pianist’s aunt.
– The man felt a little out of his element, answered Mme Verdurin. 
Now you wouldn’t expect him to have caught the tone of the house already, the very first time, like Cottard, who has been one of our little clan for years. 
The first time doesn’t count; it was useful for breaking the ice. 
Odette, it’s agreed that he’ll meet us tomorrow at the Châtelet. 
Will you pick him up?
– Ah! 
Whatever you like, then. 
As long as he doesn’t go and abandon us at the last minute!
To Mme Verdurin’s great surprise, he never abandoned them. 
He went to meet them wherever they were, sometimes in restaurants in the outlying districts where no one went much yet, because it was not the season, more often to the theatre, which Mme Verdurin liked very much; and because one day, at her house, she said in his presence that on evenings when there were premières, or galas, a pass would have been very useful to them, that it had inconvenienced them very much not to have one the day of Gambetta’s funeral,17 Swann, who never talked about his distinguished connections, but only about those which were not very highly esteemed, which he thought it indelicate to conceal, and among which he had, in the Faubourg Saint-Germain, fallen into the habit of including his relations with the official world, answered:
– I promise to take care of it, you’ll have it in time for the revival of Les Danicheff.18 
As it appens, I’m having lunch with the Prefect of Police tomorrow at the Élysée Palace.
– What? 
At the Élysée Palace? 
shouted Doctor Cottard in a thunderous voice.
– Yes, at M. Grévy’s,19 answered Swann, a little embarrassed by the effect his remark had produced.
Generally, once an explanation had been given, Cottard would say: ‘Oh, I see, that’s all right then,’ and not show a trace more of emotion. 
But this time, Swann’s last words, instead of procuring him the usual peace of mind, raised to a fever pitch his astonishment that a man with whom he had dined, who had no official position, no celebrity of any sort, would hobnob with the Head of State.
– What do you mean, M. Grévy? 
You know M. Grévy? 
he said to Swann with the stupid and incredulous look of a policeman on guard at the palace who is asked by a stranger to see the President of the Republic, and who, realizing from these words ‘what sort of person he is dealing with’, as the newspapers say, assures the poor lunatic that he will be received immediately and leads him to the special infirmary of the central police station.
– I know him slightly, we have friends in common. 
(He did not dare say that one of them was the Prince of Wales.) 
Actually, he entertains a good deal, and I assure you these lunches aren’t in the least amusing, they’re also very simple, there are never more than eight at table, answered Swann, trying to expunge what had seemed to be too dazzling, in the doctor’s eyes, about his relations with the President of the Republic.
Immediately Cottard, trusting in the truth of what Swann had said, adopted the opinion, concerning the value of an invitation to M. Grévy’s, that it was not a very desirable thing and could be picked up anywhere. 
From then on, he was no longer surprised that Swann, or anyone else, should visit the Élysée Palace, and he was even a little sorry for him because he had to go to lunches which Swann himself admitted were boring.
– Oh, I see, that’s quite all right then, he said in the tone of a customs inspector who, though suspicious a moment before, after hearing your explanations gives you his visa and lets you go through without opening your bags.
– Oh, I believe you, I’m sure those lunches must not be very amusing, and it’s good of you to go to them, said Mme Verdurin, who saw the President of the Republic as a bore to be especially dreaded because he had at his disposal various means of seduction and compulsion which, if employed upon the faithful, would be quite capable of making them desert her. 
Apparently he’s as deaf as a doorpost and eats with his fingers.
– In that case, certainly it must not be much fun to go there, said the doctor with a touch of commiseration; and, recalling that eight was the number of guests at table: ‘Are these intimate lunches?’ he asked sharply with a linguist’s zeal more than a snoop’s curiosity.
But the prestige of the President of the Republic in the eyes of the doctor ended by prevailing over both Swann’s modesty and Mme Verdurin’s animosity, and at each dinner Cottard would ask with interest: ‘Will we be seeing M. Swann this evening? He’s on personal terms with M. Grévy. Is he in fact what one would call a gentleman?’20 He even went so far as to present him with an invitation-card for the dentistry exhibition.
– This will admit you, along with anyone you might like to bring with you, but they won’t let dogs in. 
You understand, I tell you this because some friends of mine didn’t know and kicked themselves for it afterwards.
As for M. Verdurin, he noticed the bad effect produced on his wife by the discovery that Swann had influential friends whom he had never mentioned.
If they had not arranged a party somewhere, it was at the Verdurins’ that Swann would join the little clan, but he came only in the evening, and almost never agreed to have dinner there despite Odette’s earnest requests.
– I could even have dinner alone with you, if you would like that better, she would tell him.
– Oh, that would be easy enough. 
I would simply tell her my dress wasn’t ready, or my cab came late. 
There’s always a way to manage it.
But Swann said to himself that, if he showed Odette (by agreeing only to meet her after dinner) that there were other pleasures he preferred to the pleasure of being with her, a long time would pass before her appetite for him was surfeited. 
And, too, since he infinitely preferred to Odette’s kind of beauty the beauty of a little working girl as fresh and plump as a rose with whom he was smitten, he chose to spend the beginning of the evening with her, being sure of seeing Odette afterwards. 
It was for the same reasons that he never agreed to have Odette pick him up on her way to the Verdurins’. 
The little working girl would wait for him near his house at a corner known to his coachman Rémi, she would get in beside Swann and stay there in his arms until the moment the carriage drew up in front of the Verdurins’. 
When he came in, as Mme Verdurin, pointing to some roses he had sent in the morning, said to him: ‘You deserve a scolding’ and showed him a spot next to Odette, the pianist would play for the two of them the little phrase by Vinteuil that was like the national anthem of their love. 
He began with the sustained violin tremolos that are heard alone for a few measures, occupying the entire foreground, then all of a sudden they seemed to move away and, as in those paintings by Pieter de Hooch,21 which assume greater depth because of the narrow frame of a half-open door, away in the distance, in a different colour, in the velvetiness of an interposed light, the little phrase would appear, dancing, pastoral, interpolated, episodic, belonging to another world. 
It rippled past, simple and immortal, distributing here and there the gifts of its grace, with the same ineffable smile; but Swann thought he could now distinguish within it some disenchantment. 
It seemed to realize how futile was this happiness to which it was showing the way. 
In its light grace, there was something finished about it, like the detachment that follows regret. 
But this hardly mattered to him, he considered the phrase less in itself – in what it could express to a musician who was unaware of his existence or of Odette’s when he composed it, and to all those who would hear it in the centuries to come – than as a token, a memory of his love which, even for the Verdurins, even for the young pianist, would remind them of Odette and him at the same time, would join them together; so much so that when Odette, capriciously, had begged him to, he had given up the idea of having some pianist play him the entire sonata, of which he knew as yet only this passage. 
‘Why would you need the rest? she had said to him. This is our piece.’ And in fact, pained by the thought that, at the moment when it passed so close and yet infinitely far away, though it was addressed to them it did not know them, he was almost sorry it had any meaning, any intrinsic and unalterable beauty, alien to them, just as in jewels given to us, or even the letters written to us by a woman we love, we resent the water of the gem and the words of the language, because they are not created exclusively from the essence of a passing love affair and of a particular person.
It often happened that he had lingered so late with the young working girl before going to the Verdurins’ that after the little phrase had been played by the pianist, Swann would notice that it would soon be time for Odette to go home. 
He would drive her back as far as the door of her little house in the rue La Pérouse behind the Arc de Triomphe. 
And it was perhaps because of this, in order not to demand all her favours, that he sacrificed the less necessary pleasure of seeing her earlier, of arriving at the Verdurins’ with her, to the exercise of this right to leave together which she recognized as his and to which he attached a greater value, since, because of it, he had the impression that no one else saw her, no one else came between them, stopped her from being with him still, after he left her.
And so she would go back in Swann’s carriage; one night, when she had just got out of it and he was saying he would see her tomorrow, she rushed to pick a last chrysanthemum from the little garden in front of the house and gave it to him before he went off. 
He held it pressed against his lips on the way home, and when after a few days the flower withered, he locked it with great care in his secretary-desk.
But he never went into her house. 
Only twice, he had gone there in the afternoon to participate in that operation which was of such capital importance for her: ‘having tea’. 
The isolation and emptiness of the short streets (almost all of them lined with small contiguous private houses, whose monotony would suddenly be interrupted by some sinister street-stall, the historic sign and sordid remains of a time when these districts were still in bad repute), the snow that lingered in the garden and on the trees, the slovenliness of the season, the proximity of nature, lent something more mysterious to the warmth, the flowers that he had found when he went in.
Leaving to the left, on the raised ground floor, Odette’s bedroom, which looked out on a little parallel street in the back, a straight staircase between walls painted a dark colour and hung with Oriental cloths, strings of Turkish beads and a large Japanese lantern suspended from a slender silk cord (but illuminated, so as not to deprive visitors of the latest comforts of Western civilization, with gas) led up to the drawing-room and the morning-room. 
These were preceded by a narrow vestibule whose wall, chequered by a garden trellis, but a gilded one, was lined down its entire length by a rectangular box in which bloomed, as in a greenhouse, a row of those fat chrysanthemums which were still rare at that time, yet nothing like the ones that horticulturalists later succeeded in obtaining. 
Swann was irritated by the fashion that had favoured them since the previous year, but he had taken pleasure, this time, in seeing the half-light of the room striped with pink, orange and white by the fragrant rays of these ephemeral stars which light up on grey days. 
Odette had received him in a morning-gown of pink silk, her neck and arms bare. 
She had had him sit next to her in one of the many mysterious alcoves that were contrived in the bays of the drawing-room, protected by immense palm trees contained in china flowerpot-holders, or by screens festooned with photographs, bows of ribbon and fans. 
She had said to him: ‘You aren’t comfortable like that, wait, I’ll fix you up,’ and with the conceited little laugh she would have given at some invention of her own, had settled behind Swann’s head, and under his feet, cushions of Japanese silk which she kneaded as if she were lavish with these riches and careless of their value. 
But when the valet came bringing one after another the many lamps which, nearly all enclosed in large Chinese vases, burned singly or in pairs, all on different pieces of furniture as though on altars, and which had summoned back to the already almost nocturnal twilight of that late winter afternoon a more lasting sunset, rosier and more human – perhaps making some lover stop and day-dream in the street before the mystery of the presence that was at once disclosed and concealed by the glowing panes – she had watched the servant severely from the corner of her eye to see whether he was setting them down properly in their consecrated places. 
She thought that, if even one were put where it should not be, the overall effect of her drawing-room would be ruined, and her portrait, placed on a sloping stand draped in plush, poorly lit. 
And so she fervently followed the movements of the ungainly man and reprimanded him sharply when he went too close to two flower stands which she took care to clean herself for fear they would be damaged and which she now went over to examine to see if he had chipped them. 
She thought all her Chinese knick-knacks had ‘amusing’ shapes, and also the orchids, the cattleyas22 especially, which were, along with the chrysanthemums, her favourite flowers, because they had the great merit of not resembling flowers, but of being made of silk, of satin. 
‘This one looks as though it were cut from the lining of my coat,’ she said to Swann, showing him an orchid, with a suggestion of respect for this very ‘chic’ flower, for this elegant and unexpected sister which nature had given her, so far removed from her on the scale of living creatures and yet so refined, more deserving than many women of being given a place in her drawing-room. 
As she showed him, first, chimeras with tongues of fire decorating a vase or embroidered on a screen, then the corollas of a bouquet of orchids, then a dromedary of silver inlaid with niello with eyes encrusted with rubies that stood on the mantelpiece next to a jade toad, she affected, first, fear of the wickedness, or laughter at the oddity, of the monsters, then blushes at the indecency of the flowers and then an irresistible desire to go and kiss the dromedary and the toad, which she called: ‘dears’. 
And these affections contrasted with the sincerity of certain of her devotions, notably to Our Lady of Laghet,23 who had once, when she lived in Nice, cured her of a fatal illness, and whose gold medal she always wore, attributing to it unlimited powers. 
Odette made Swann ‘her’ tea, asked him: ‘Lemon or cream?’ and when he answered ‘cream,’ said to him laughing: ‘A cloud!’ And when he found it good: ‘You see I know what you like.’ This tea, in fact, seemed as precious a thing to Swann as it did to her, and love has such need to find a justification for itself, a guarantee that it will last, in pleasures which in fact would not be pleasures without it and which end when it ends, that when he left her at seven o’clock to go home and dress, during the whole trip that he made in his coupé, unable to contain the joy which the afternoon had given him, he kept repeating to himself: ‘How nice it would be to have a little woman like that in whose home one could always find that rare thing, a good cup of tea.’ An hour later, he received a note from Odette and immediately recognized the large handwriting, in which an affectation of British stiffness imposed an appearance of discipline on ill-formed letters that would perhaps have signified, to less prejudiced eyes, an untidiness of mind, an insufficient education, a lack of frankness and resolution. 
Swann had forgotten his cigarette case at Odette’s. 
‘If you had forgotten your heart here too, I would not have let you have it back.’
A second visit he made to her was perhaps more important. 
Going to her house that day, as always when he was to see her, he pictured her to himself beforehand; and his need, if he was to find her face pretty, to limit what he imagined of her cheeks only to her fresh, pink cheekbones since the rest was so often yellow, languid, sometimes marked with little red specks, distressed him as proving that the ideal is inaccessible and happiness mediocre. 
He had brought her an engraving that she wanted to see. 
She was a little unwell; she received him in a mauve crêpe de Chine dressing-gown, pulling the richly embroidered material over her chest like a cloak. 
Standing next to him, allowing her hair, which she had undone, to flow down her cheeks, bending one leg somewhat in the position of a dancer so that without getting tired she could lean over the engraving, which she looked at, inclining her head, with those large eyes of hers, so tired and sullen when she was not animated, she struck Swann by her resemblance to the figure of Zipporah, Jethro’s daughter, in a fresco in the Sistine Chapel.24 
Swann had always had this peculiar penchant for liking to rediscover in the paintings of the masters not only the general characteristics of the real world that surrounds us, but what seems on the contrary the least susceptible to generalization, the individual features of the faces we know: for instance, in the material of a bust of the Doge Loredano by Antonio Rizzo,25 the jut of the cheekbones, the slant of the eyebrows, altogether the very evident resemblance to his coachman Rémi; under the colours of a Ghirlandaio,26 M. de Palancy’s nose; in a portrait by Tintoretto,27 the invasion of the cheek’s fat by the implantation of the first hairs of the side-whiskers, the break in the nose, the penetration of the gaze, the congestion of the eyelids of Doctor du Boulbon. 
Perhaps because he had always continued to feel a touch of remorse that he had limited his life to worldly relationships, to conversation, he believed he could find a sort of indulgent pardon granted him by the great artists, in the fact that they too had contemplated with pleasure, introduced into their work, faces like these, which give it a singular certificate of reality and of truth to life, a modern flavour; perhaps, also, he had allowed himself to be so caught up in the frivolity of the society people that he felt the need to look into an old work of art for these anticipated and rejuvenating allusions to current proper names. 
Perhaps, on the other hand, he still had enough of an artist’s nature so that these individual characteristics gave him pleasure by assuming a more general meaning as soon as he saw them extirpated, emancipated, in the resemblance between an older portrait and an original which it did not represent. 
Whatever the case, and perhaps because the abundance of impressions that he had been receiving for some time, and even though this abundance had come to him more with his love of music, had enriched even his delight in painting, he now found a deeper pleasure – and this was to exert a permanent influence on Swann – in Odette’s resemblance to Zipporah as painted by Sandro di Mariano, whom people call more often by his popular nickname of Botticelli, since that name evokes, not the painter’s true work, but the vulgarized idea of it, banal and false. 
He no longer appraised Odette’s face according to the finer or poorer quality of her cheeks and the purely flesh-coloured softness he supposed he must find when he touched them with his lips if he ever dared to kiss her, but as a skein of subtle and beautiful lines that his eyes reeled off, following the curve of their winding, joining the cadence of her nape to the effusion of her hair and the flexion of her eyelids, as in a portrait of her in which her type became intelligible and clear.
He looked at her; a fragment of the fresco appeared in her face and in her body and from then on he would always try to find it in her again, whether he was with Odette, or was only thinking of her, and even though he probably valued the Florentine masterpiece only because he found it again in her, nevertheless that resemblance conferred a certain beauty on her too, made her more precious. 
Swann reproached himself for having misunderstood the value of a creature who would have appeared captivating to the great Sandro, and he felt happy that his pleasure in seeing Odette could be justified by his own aesthetic culture. 
He told himself that, in associating the thought of Odette with his dreams of happiness, he had not been resigning himself to a second-best as imperfect as he had believed until now, since she satisfied his most refined artistic tastes. 
He forgot that this did not make Odette any more the sort of woman he desired, since in fact his desire had always been oriented in a direction opposite to his aesthetic tastes. 
The words ‘Florentine work of art’ did Swann a great service. 
They allowed him, like a title, to bring Odette’s image into a world of dreams to which she had not had access until then and where she was steeped in nobility. 
And, while the purely fleshly view he had had of this woman, by perpetually renewing his doubts about the quality of her face, her body, her whole beauty, had weakened his love, these doubts were vanquished, that love confirmed when he had instead, for a foundation, the principles of an unquestionable aesthetic; while the kiss and the possession that would seem natural and ordinary if they had been granted him by damaged flesh, if they came to crown the adoration of a museum piece, appeared to him necessarily supernatural and delicious.
And when he was tempted to regret the fact that for months now he had done nothing but see Odette, he said to himself that it was reasonable to give a good deal of his time to an inestimable masterpiece, cast for once in a different and particularly savoury material, in a most rare exemplar that he contemplated sometimes with the humility, spirituality and disinterestedness of an artist, and sometimes with the pride, egotism and sensuality of a collector.
He placed on his work table, as if it were a photograph of Odette, a reproduction of Jethro’s daughter. 
He admired the large eyes, the delicate face, which allowed one to imagine the imperfect skin, the marvellous curls of the hair along the tired cheeks, and adapting what he had found aesthetically beautiful up to then to the idea of a living woman, he translated it into physical attractions which he rejoiced to find united in a creature whom he could possess. 
The vague feeling of sympathy that draws us towards a masterpiece as we look at it became, now that he knew the fleshly original of Jethro’s daughter, a desire that henceforth compensated for the desire that Odette’s body had not at first inspired in him. 
When he had looked at that Botticelli for a long time, he would think of his own Botticelli, whom he found even more beautiful and, bringing Zipporah’s photograph close to him, he would believe he was clasping Odette against his heart.
And yet he strained his ingenuity not only to prevent Odette from becoming tired of him, but also, sometimes, to prevent himself from becoming tired of her; feeling that, ever since Odette had had every opportunity for seeing him, she did not seem to have much to say to him, he was afraid that the rather banal, monotonous, and more or less permanently predetermined manner she now had when they were together would end by killing the romantic hope he had that one day she would declare her passion, a hope which alone had made him fall in love and stay in love. 
And in order to work a little reformation in Odette’s too fixed mental attitude, which he was afraid would make him grow tired of her, he would suddenly write her a letter full of feigned disappointment and simulated anger that he would send round to her before dinner. 
He knew that she would be dismayed, and would answer him, and he hoped that in the contraction of her soul caused by the fear of losing him, words would spring forth that she had never yet said to him; – and in fact it was by doing this that he had obtained the most tender letters she had yet written to him, including one, which she had sent round to him at noon from La Maison Dorée28 (it was the day of the Paris-Murcia fête, held for the flood victims of Murcia),29 that began with these words: ‘My dearest, my hand is trembling so badly I can hardly write,’ and that he had kept in the same drawer as the dry chrysanthemum flower. 
Or, if she had not had time to write to him, when he arrived at the Verdurins’ she would come up to him quickly, saying: ‘I have to talk to you,’ and he would gaze curiously at what he saw in her face and her words that she had until then kept hidden from him, of all that was in her heart.
Even as he approached the Verdurins’, when he saw the large lamp-lit windows whose shutters were never closed, he was moved as he thought of the charming creature he was going to see in full bloom in their golden light. 
Now and then the figures of the guests stood out in silhouette, slender and black, screening the lamps, like those little pictures intercalated at intervals around a translucent lampshade whose other panels are plain light. 
He would try to distinguish Odette’s silhouette. 
Then, as soon as he arrived, without his realizing it, his eyes would shine with such joy that M. Verdurin would say to the painter: ‘I think it’s getting warm.’ And for Swann, Odette’s presence did indeed add something to this house which none of the others in which he was entertained possessed: a sort of sensory apparatus, a nervous system ramifying through all the rooms and causing constant excitations in his heart.
And so the simple functioning of that social organism, the little ‘clan’, automatically arranged daily meetings with Odette for Swann and allowed him to feign an indifference to seeing her, or even a desire not to see her, which did not make him run any great risks, since, whatever he wrote to her during the day, he would necessarily see her that evening and take her home.
But once when, having glumly contemplated that inevitable ride home together, he had taken his young working girl all the way to the Bois in order to delay the moment of going to the Verdurins’, he arrived at their house so late that Odette, thinking he would not be coming, had already left. 
When he saw that she was no longer in the drawing-room, Swann felt a pain in his heart; he trembled at being deprived of a pleasure that he was now measuring for the first time, having had until then that certainty of finding it when he wanted it which in the case of all pleasures diminishes for us, or even prevents us from perceiving at all, their greatness.
– Did you notice the look on his face when he saw she wasn’t here? 
said M. Verdurin to his wife, I think one may say he’s smitten!
– The look on his face? 
asked Doctor Cottard violently since, having gone away for a moment to see a patient and returned to pick up his wife, he did not know whom they were talking about.
– What, you didn’t meet the most handsome of all Swanns at the front door…
– Oh, just for a moment. 
We had a very agitated, a very nervous Swann. 
You see, Odette had already left.
– You mean she’s on a most intimate footing with him, she has given him the key to her city? 
asked the doctor, cautiously testing the meaning of the expressions.
– No, no, there’s absolutely nothing going on, and just between us, I think she’s making a great mistake and behaving like a real idiot, which she is, in fact.
– Tut, tut, tut, said M. Verdurin. 
What do you know about it, how do you know there’s nothing going on? 
We haven’t gone there to see for ourselves, have we?
– She would have told me, retorted Mme Verdurin proudly. 
I tell you she lets me know about all her little affairs! 
As she hasn’t anyone just now, I told her she ought to sleep with him. 
She claims she can’t, she says she was certainly rather infatuated with him at first, but that he’s shy with her, which makes her shy with him, and then anyway she doesn’t love him that way, he’s some sort of ideal for her, she’s afraid of taking the bloom off the feeling she has for him, what do I know? 
Yet it would be just what she needs.
– Allow me to disagree with you, said M. Verdurin. 
I’m not overly fond of the gentleman’s looks; I think he’s affected.
Mme Verdurin froze, assumed an inert expression as if she had turned into a statue, a fiction that allowed it to be assumed that she had not heard that intolerable word ‘affected’, which seemed to imply that one could ‘be affected’ with them, therefore that one was ‘better than them’.
– Anyway, if there’s nothing going on, I don’t think it’s because the gentleman thinks she’s virtuous, M. Verdurin said ironically. 
And after all, one can’t say anything, since he seems to think she’s intelligent. 
I don’t know if you heard what he was declaiming to her the other evening about Vinteuil’s sonata; I love Odette with all my heart, but to construct aesthetic theories for her benefit, you’d really have to be quite an imbecile!
– Now, don’t say bad things about Odette, said Mme Verdurin, playing the child. 
She’s so charming.
– But she can still be charming. 
We aren’t saying bad things about her, we’re saying she’s not a saint, she’s not a genius. 
In fact, he said to the painter, are you really so anxious for her to be virtuous? 
Who knows – perhaps she would be far less charming.
On the landing, Swann had been approached by the butler, who had not been there when he arrived and had been instructed by Odette – but this was already an hour before – to tell him, in case he should still come, that she would probably go and have some chocolate at Prévost’s30 before returning home. 
Swann left for Prévost’s, but at every step of the way his carriage was stopped by other carriages or by people crossing the street, loathsome obstacles that he would gladly have knocked down if the policeman’s report would not have delayed him even more than the passing of a pedestrian. 
He counted the time he was taking, and added a few seconds to all the minutes to be sure of not having made them too short, which would have allowed him to think the chance was greater than it really was that he would arrive early enough and still find Odette. 
And at one point, like a man in a fever who has just been sleeping and who becomes aware of the absurdity of the dreams he had been contemplating without clearly distinguishing himself from them, Swann suddenly perceived how alien to himself were the thoughts he had been revolving since the moment when he had been told at the Verdurins’ that Odette had already left, the new pain he was suffering in his heart, but noted it only as though he had just woken up. 
What? 
All this agitation because he would not see Odette till tomorrow, exactly what he had wanted, an hour ago, when he arrived at Mme Verdurin’s! 
He was obliged to acknowledge that in this same carriage which was taking him to Prévost’s he was no longer the same, and that he was no longer alone, that a new person was there with him, attached to him, amalgamated to him, one from whom he might not be able to free himself, whom he was going to have to treat with circumspection, like a master or an illness. 
And yet for a moment now, since he had felt a new person had been added to him in this way, his life had seemed to him more interesting. 
He hardly said to himself that this possible meeting at Prévost’s, however (the expectation of which so disordered, so denuded the moments preceding it that he could no longer find a single idea, a single memory within which he could rest his mind), would probably, if it took place, be like the others, not much of anything. 
As on every other evening, once he was with Odette, casting on her changing face a furtive glance which he would immediately turn away for fear that she would see in it his mounting desire and no longer believe in his disinterest, he would cease to be able to think about her, too occupied with finding pretexts that would permit him not to leave her right away and to make certain, without seeming to care about it, that he would see her again the next day at the Verdurins’: that is, to prolong for the moment and to renew yet one more day the disappointment and torment that came to him from the pointless presence of this woman whom he saw so regularly without daring to take her in his arms.
She was not at Prévost’s; he wanted to look in every restaurant along the boulevards. 
In order to gain time, while he visited some he sent into the others his coachman Rémi (the Doge Loredano by Rizzo), for whom he then waited – having found nothing himself – at a place he had specified to him. 
The carriage did not return and Swann pictured to himself the approaching moment, as both the moment in which Rémi would say to him: ‘The lady is here,’ and the moment in which Rémi would say to him: ‘The lady was not in any of the cafés.’ And so he saw the end of the evening before him, single and yet alternative, preceded either by a meeting with Odette which would put an end to his agony, or by a forced renunciation of finding her this evening, by an acceptance of returning home without having seen her.
The coachman came back, but at the moment he stopped in front of Swann, Swann did not say to him: ‘Did you find the lady?’ but: ‘Now remind me, tomorrow, to order more wood; I think our supply must be starting to run out.’ Perhaps he had told himself that if Rémi had found Odette in some café where she was waiting for him, the end of the ill-fated evening would already be cancelled out by the realization, which was just beginning, of the blissful end of the evening and that he did not need to rush to seize a happiness that was already captured and held in a safe place, that would not be able to break free. 
But it was also from the force of inertia; there was in his disposition that lack of suppleness which certain people have in their bodies, those who at the moment when they need to avoid a collision, snatch a flame away from their clothing, perform any other urgent motion, take their time, begin by remaining for a second in the position in which they were before, as though to find in it their springboard, their source of momentum. 
And no doubt, if the coachman had interrupted him by saying: ‘The lady is there,’ he would have answered: ‘Oh yes, of course, the errand I sent you on! Well, well! Is that so?’ and would have gone on talking to him about supplies of wood in order to hide the emotion he felt and allow himself time to separate from his uneasiness and give himself up to his happiness.
But the coachman came back to tell him he had not found her anywhere, and added his opinion, old servant that he was:
But the indifference that Swann had no trouble feigning as long as Rémi could do nothing further to change the answer he had brought back fell from him, when he saw Rémi attempt to make him give up hope and abandon his search:
– No, not at all, he cried, we must find the lady; it’s terribly important. 
She would be extremely annoyed – it’s a business matter – she would be extremely offended, if she didn’t see me.
– I don’t see how the lady could be offended, answered Rémi, since she’s the one who left without waiting for Monsieur, and since she said she would go to Prévost’s and then she wasn’t there.
Lights were beginning to go out all around him. 
Under the trees on the boulevards, in a mysterious darkness, fewer people wandered past, barely recognizable. 
Now and then the shadow of a woman coming up to him, murmuring a word in his ear, asking him to take her home, would make Swann start. 
He brushed anxiously against all those dim bodies as if, among the phantoms of the dead, in the kingdom of darkness, he were searching for Eurydice.
Of all love’s modes of production, of all the disseminating agents of the holy evil, surely one of the most efficacious is this great breath of agitation which sometimes blows down on us. 
Then the die is cast, and the person whose company we enjoy at the time is the one we will love. 
It is not even necessary for us to have liked him better than anyone else up to then, or even as much. 
What is necessary is that our predilection for him should become exclusive. 
And that condition is fulfilled when – at a moment like this, when we do not have him with us – the quest for the pleasures that his charm gave us is suddenly replaced in us by an anxious need whose object is this person himself, an absurd need which the laws of this world make impossible to satisfy and difficult to cure – the senseless and painful need to possess him.
Swann asked to be driven to the last remaining restaurants; it was only the hypothesis of happiness he had been able to envisage calmly; now he no longer hid his agitation, the value he placed on this meeting, and he promised a reward to his coachman if they were successful, as though, by inspiring him with a desire to succeed that would be added to his own, he could make Odette appear, even if she had already gone home to bed, in a restaurant on the boulevard. 
He pushed on as far as La Maison Dorée, went into Tortoni’s31 twice, and, still without having seen her had just come out of the Café Anglais32 again, walking fast with a wild look on his face, back to the carriage which was waiting for him at the corner of the boulevard des Italiens, when he bumped into someone coming in the opposite direction: it was Odette; later, she explained that she had not found a seat at Prévost’s and so had gone to have supper at La Maison Dorée in an alcove where he had not noticed her, and she was on her way back to her carriage.
She had so little expected to see him that she started back in fear. 
And he himself had run all over Paris not because he thought it was possible to find her, but because it was too hard for him to give up the search. 
But the joy which his reason had continued to believe was beyond realization that night only seemed to him all the more real now; for since he had not collaborated with it by foreseeing its probabilities, it remained external to him; he did not need to reach into his mind in order to furnish it with truth, it was from itself that the truth emanated, it itself projected that truth towards him, that truth whose radiance dispelled like a dream the isolation he had so dreaded, that truth on which he now based, on which he now rested, without thinking, his happy reverie. 
In the same way, a traveller arriving at the Mediterranean shore on a day of fine weather, no longer certain whether the lands he has just left behind really exist, allows his vision to be dazzled, rather than looking at them himself, by the rays of light emitted in his direction by the luminous, resistant azure of the waters.
He stepped up with her into the carriage that she had waiting there, and told his own to follow.
She was holding a bunch of cattleyas in her hand and Swann saw, under her lace scarf, that she had flowers of the same orchid in her hair, fastened to a plume of swan feathers. 
She was dressed, under her mantilla, in a flood of black velvet caught up on one side to reveal in a wide triangle the hem of a skirt of white faille and showing a yoke, also of white faille, at the opening of a low-necked bodice tucked with more cattleya flowers. 
She had barely recovered from the fright Swann had given her when some obstacle made the horse shy. 
They were roughly jolted, she cried out and began trembling all over, breathless.
And he put his arm around her shoulder, supporting her against himself; then he said:
– Now don’t talk to me, just answer with a sign so you don’t get even more out of breath. 
It won’t bother you, will it, if I straighten the flowers in your bodice? 
They were knocked out of place when the carriage lurched. 
I’m afraid you may lose them, I’ll push them in a little.
She was not used to seeing a man make such a fuss over her, and said, smiling:
But he, intimidated by her answer, and perhaps also so as to appear to have been sincere when he had used that excuse, or even beginning to believe that he had been, exclaimed:
Smiling, she shrugged her shoulders a little, as though to say ‘you’re quite mad; you can see very well that I like it.’
He ran his other hand up along Odette’s cheek; she gazed at him steadily, with the grave and languid look of the women by the Florentine master whom he had discovered she resembled; protruding to the edges of her lids, her shining eyes, wide and thin, like theirs, seemed about to well out like two tears. 
She bent her neck as you see them all do, in the pagan scenes as well as in the religious pictures. 
And in a position that was no doubt habitual for her, which she knew was appropriate to moments like this and which she took care not to forget to adopt, she seemed to require all her strength to hold her face back, as though an invisible force were drawing it towards Swann. 
And it was Swann who, before she let it fall, as though despite herself, on his lips, held it back for an instant, at a certain distance, between his two hands. 
He had wanted to give his mind time to catch up, to recognize the dream that it had caressed for so long and to be present at its realization, like a relative summoned to witness the success of a child she has loved very much. 
Perhaps Swann was also fastening upon this face of an Odette he had not yet possessed, an Odette he had not yet even kissed, this face he was seeing for the last time, the gaze with which, on a day of departure, we hope to carry away with us a landscape we are about to leave for ever.
But he was so timid with her that, having ended by possessing her that night, after beginning by arranging her cattleyas, either from dread of offending her, or from fear of appearing in retrospect to have lied, or from a lack of audacity in formulating a greater demand than this one (which he could renew since it had not angered Odette the first time), in the days following he made use of the same pretext. 
If she had cattleyas tucked in her blouse, he would say: ‘It’s a pity, this evening the cattleyas don’t need to be straightened, they haven’t been jostled the way they were the other evening; it seems to me, though, that this one isn’t quite straight. May I see if these have more fragrance than the others?’ Or, if she had none: ‘Oh! No cattleyas tonight, no way for me to indulge in my little rearrangements.’ So that, for some time, the order he had followed the first night, when he began by touching Odette’s throat with his fingers and lips, was not changed, and his caresses still began this way each time; and much later, when the rearrangement (or the ritual simulacrum of rearrangement) of the cattleyas had long since fallen into disuse, the metaphor ‘make cattleya’, having become a simple utterance they used without thinking about it when they wanted to signify the act of physical possession – in which, in fact, one possesses nothing – lived on in their language, commemorating it, after that forgotten custom. 
And perhaps this individual way of saying ‘make love’ did not mean exactly the same thing as its synonyms. 
Even if one is tired of women, even if one believes that the possession of the most various women is always the same and familiar beforehand, this possession becomes a new pleasure if it involves women difficult enough – or believed to be so by us – so that we have to make it happen as a result of some episode in our relationship with them that is unforeseen, as had been for Swann, the first time, the rearranging of the cattleyas. 
He tremulously hoped, that night (but Odette, he told himself, if she was fooled by his ruse, would not be able to guess as much), that the possession of this woman was what would emerge from among their broad mauve petals; and the pleasure he felt already and that Odette was perhaps tolerating, he thought, only because she had not recognized it, seemed to him, because of that – as it might seem to the first man who tasted it among the flowers of earthly paradise – a pleasure that had not existed until then, that he was seeking to create, a pleasure – signalled by the special name he gave it – entirely individual and new.
Now, every evening, when he took her home, he had to go in, and often she came back out in a dressing-gown and led him to his carriage, kissed him within view of the coachman, saying: ‘What difference does it make to me, what other people think of me?’ On evenings when he did not go to the Verdurins’ (which happened sometimes now that he had another way of seeing her), on the increasingly rare evenings when he went into society, she would ask him to come to see her on his way home, whatever the hour. 
It was spring, a clear and icy spring. 
Coming out of a party, he would get into his victoria, spread a rug over his legs, tell the friends who were going off at the same time and who had asked him to join them, that he could not, that he was not going in the same direction, and the coachman would leave at a fast trot knowing where to go. 
They would be amazed, and, in fact, Swann was not the same. 
No one ever received a letter from him now asking for an introduction to some woman. 
He no longer paid any attention to women, avoided going to places where one might meet them. 
In a restaurant, in the country, his attitude was the opposite of the one by which, just recently, he could be recognized and which had seemed to have been his always. 
To such an extent does a passion manifest itself in us as a temporary and distinct character that replaces our other character and eliminates the signs, invariable until then, by which it was expressed! 
Now, however, what was invariable was that, wherever Swann might be, he did not fail to go to meet Odette. 
The path that separated him from her was the one he inevitably travelled as though it were the slope itself, rapid and irresistible, of his life. 
In truth, when he had stayed out late, he would often have preferred to go directly home without making that long trip, and not see her until the next day; but the very fact of taking the trouble to go to her house at an unusual hour, of guessing that the friends who were leaving him were saying to themselves: ‘He is tied hand and foot, some woman must be insisting that he go to her whatever the hour,’ made him feel he was leading the life of men known to be having a love affair and in whom the fact that they are sacrificing their sleep and their other interests to a dream of sensuous pleasure produces an inner charm. 
Then again, without his realizing it, the certainty that she was waiting for him, that she was not somewhere else with other people, that he would not return without seeing her, neutralized the anguish, forgotten but always ready to be reawakened, that he had felt the night when Odette was not at the Verdurins’, and of which the present assuagement was so sweet that it could be named happiness. 
Perhaps it was to this anguish that he owed the fact that Odette had assumed such importance for him. 
Other people usually leave us so indifferent that when we have invested in one person such possibilities of causing us pain and joy, she seems to belong to another universe, she is surrounded with poetry, she makes our life into a sort of expanse of emotion in which she will be closer to us or less close. 
Swann could not ask himself without anxiety what Odette would mean to him in the years to come. 
Now and then, as he saw, from his victoria, on those lovely cold nights, the shining moon spreading its brightness between his eyes and the deserted streets, he would think of that other face, bright and tinged with pink like the moon’s, which, one day, had appeared in the forefront of his mind and, since then, had cast on the world the mysterious light in which he saw it. 
If he arrived after the hour when Odette sent her servants to bed, before ringing at the gate of the little garden he would first go into the street on to which looked out, on the ground floor, between the windows, all alike but dark, of the contiguous houses, the only lit one, the window of her bedroom. 
He would rap at the pane, and she, alerted, would answer and go and wait for him on the other side, at the front door. 
He would find several of her favourite pieces open on the piano: the Valse des Roses or Pauvre Fou by Tagliafico33 (which should, according to her wishes which she had put into writing, be performed at her funeral), he would ask her to play instead the little phrase from Vinteuil’s sonata, even though Odette played very badly, but the loveliest vision of a work of art that stays with us is often the one that transcended the wrong notes coaxed by unskilful fingers from an out-of-tune piano. 
For Swann the little phrase continued to be associated with the love he felt for Odette. 
He was aware that this love was something that did not correspond to anything external, anything verifiable by others besides him; he realized that Odette’s qualities did not justify his attaching so much value to the time he spent with her. 
And often, when his positive intelligence alone prevailed in Swann, he wanted to stop sacrificing so many intellectual and social interests to this imaginary pleasure. 
But as soon as he heard it, the little phrase had the power to open up within him the space it needed, the proportions of Swann’s soul were changed by it; a margin was reserved in him for a bliss that also did not correspond to any external object, and yet, instead of being purely individual, like the enjoyment of that love, assumed for Swann a reality superior to that of concrete things. 
The little phrase incited in him this thirst for an unfamiliar delight, but it did not give him anything precise to assuage it. 
So that those parts of Swann’s soul from which the little phrase had erased any concern for material interests, any considerations that were human and valid for all people, it had left vacant and blank, and in them he was free to write Odette’s name. 
Also, to what Odette’s affection might have about it that was somewhat limited and disappointing, the little phrase came along to add, to amalgamate its mysterious essence. 
From the sight of Swann’s face as he listened to the phrase, one would have said he was absorbing an anaesthetic that allowed him to breathe more deeply. 
And the pleasure which the music gave him, and which was soon to create in him a true need, did indeed resemble, at those moments, the pleasure he would have found in testing fragrances, in entering into contact with a world for which we are not made, which seems formless to us because our eyes do not perceive it, meaningless because it evades our understanding, which we can attain only through a single sense. 
What great repose, what mysterious renewal for Swann – for him whose eyes, though refined lovers of painting, whose mind, though a shrewd observer of manners, bore forever the indelible trace of the dryness of his life – to feel himself transformed into a creature strange to humanity, blind, without logical faculties, almost a fantastic unicorn, a chimerical creature perceiving the world only through his hearing. 
And since he still searched the little phrase for a meaning to which his understanding could not descend, what strange drunkenness he felt, as he divested his innermost soul of all the help of reason and forced it to pass alone through the sieve, through the dark filter of sound! 
He began to become aware of all that was painful, perhaps even secretly unappeased in the depths of the sweetness of that phrase, but it could not hurt him. 
What did it matter if it told him love was fragile, his own love was so strong! 
He toyed with the sadness it diffused, he felt it pass over him, but in a caress that only deepened and sweetened his sense of his own happiness. 
He made Odette play it ten times, twenty times, demanding that while she did so she should not stop kissing him. 
Each kiss summons another kiss. 
Ah, in those first days of love, kisses come so naturally! 
So closely, in their profusion, do they crowd together; and it would be as hard for you to count the kisses you give each other in an hour as the flowers of a field in the month of May. 
Then she would make as if to stop, saying: ‘How can you expect me to play like that if you hold on to me? I can’t do everything at once. Now decide what you want – should I play the piano or play with you?’, he would become annoyed, she would burst out laughing, and her laughter would change and descend on him in a rain of kisses. 
Or she would look at him with a sullen expression, once again he would see before him a face worthy of appearing in Botticelli’s Life of Moses, he would place her in it, he would give Odette’s neck the necessary inclination; and when he had well and truly painted her in distemper, in the fifteenth century, on the wall of the Sistine Chapel, the idea that she had nevertheless remained here, by the piano, in the present moment, ready to be kissed and possessed, the idea of her materiality and her life would intoxicate him with such force that, his eye distracted, his jaw tensed as though to devour her, he would swoop down upon that Botticelli virgin and begin pinching her cheeks. 
Then, once he had left her, not without going back in to kiss her again because he had forgotten to carry away in his memory some detail of her smell or her features, while he was returning home in his victoria, he would bless Odette for allowing him these daily visits, which he felt could not give her very great joy, but which, by saving him from becoming jealous – by relieving him of the occasion for suffering again from the disease that had broken out in him on the evening when he had not found her at the Verdurins’ – would help him to arrive, without having any more of those crises of which the first had been so painful and would remain the only one, at the end of this singular period of his life, these hours that were almost enchanted, like those in which he crossed Paris in the light of the moon. 
And, noticing, during his return, that the star had now moved in relation to him and was almost at the edge of the horizon, feeling that his love, too, was obeying immutable and natural laws, he asked himself whether this period he had entered would last much longer, whether, soon, his thoughts would no longer see the dear face except as occupying a distant and diminished place, and nearly ceasing to radiate any charm. 
For Swann did find charm in things, now that he was in love, just as in the time when, as an adolescent, he had thought he was an artist; but this was no longer the same charm; Odette alone conferred it on them. 
He felt the inspirations of his youth, which had been dissipated by a frivolous life, reawakening in him, but they all bore the reflection, the mark of a particular being; and, in the long hours which he now found a delicate pleasure in spending at home, alone with his convalescing soul, little by little he became himself again, but for another.
He went to her house only in the evening, and he knew nothing about how she spent her time during the day, any more than about her past, so much so that he lacked even that initial bit of information which, by allowing us to imagine for ourselves what we do not know, makes us want to know it. 
Thus, he did not ask himself what she might be doing, nor what sort of life she had had. 
He merely smiled sometimes at the thought that a few years before, when he did not know her, someone had talked to him about a woman who, if he remembered rightly, must certainly have been she, as being a courtesan, a kept woman, one of those women to whom he still attributed, since he had spent very little time in their company, the wilful, fundamentally perverse character with which they were for so long endowed by the imaginations of certain novelists. 
He would tell himself that often if one simply believes the opposite of the reputation the world has formed one will judge a person accurately, when he contrasted the character of such a woman with that of Odette, good, naïve, enamoured of idealism, so nearly incapable of not telling the truth that, after he begged her one day, so that he could have dinner alone with her, to write to the Verdurins telling them that she was unwell, the next day he had seen her, face to face with Mme Verdurin, who was asking her if she felt better, blush, stammer and reveal on her face despite herself what an affliction, what a torment it was for her to lie, and, while in her answer she multiplied the invented details of her alleged indisposition the day before, appear to be asking forgiveness, by her supplicating looks and her sorrowful voice, for the falseness of her words.
On certain days, however, though they were rare, she came to his home in the afternoon, interrupting his day-dreams or the study of Vermeer he had resumed lately. 
His servant would come to tell him that Mme de Crécy was in his morning-room. 
He would go off to find her there, and when he opened the door, as soon as she saw Swann, a smile would come and settle in Odette’s rosy face, changing the shape of her mouth, the look in her eyes, the modelling of her cheeks. 
When he was alone again, he would see that smile, he would see the one she had given him the day before, another with which she had greeted him on some occasion or other, the one with which she had responded, in the carriage, when he had asked her if it annoyed her that he was straightening her cattleyas; and Odette’s life during the rest of the time, since he knew nothing about it, appeared to him, with its neutral and colourless background, similar to those pages of studies by Watteau34 in which one sees, here, there, in every corner, from every angle, drawn in three colours on buff paper, innumerable smiles. 
But sometimes, in a corner of that life which Swann saw as completely empty, even if his mind told him it was not, because he could not imagine it, some friend, who, suspecting they loved each other, would not have ventured to tell him anything about her except what was insignificant, would describe to him Odette’s form, which he had seen, that very morning, going up the rue Abbatucci35 on foot in a ‘visiting cloak’ trimmed with skunk, under a ‘Rembrandt-style’ hat and with a bouquet of violets at her blouse. 
This simple sketch was greatly disturbing to Swann because it suddenly made him see that Odette had a life which did not belong entirely to him; he wanted to know whom she had been trying to please with that outfit, which he did not know she possessed; he would promise himself to ask her where she had been going, at that moment, as if in the whole of his mistress’s colourless life – almost inexistent, because it was invisible to him – there had been only one thing apart from all those smiles directed at him: her walking under a Rembrandt-style hat, with a bunch of violets in her bodice.
Except when he asked her for the little phrase by Vinteuil instead of The Waltz of the Roses, Swann did not try to make her play things he liked or, any more in music than in literature, to correct her bad taste. 
He fully realized that she was not intelligent. 
When she told him she would like it so much if he would tell her about the great poets, she had imagined that she would immediately become familiar with heroic and romantic couplets like those by the Vicomte de Borelli,36 but even more moving. 
As for Vermeer of Delft, she asked if he had ever suffered because of a woman, if it was a woman who had inspired him, and when Swann admitted to her that no one knew anything about that, she lost interest in the painter. 
She often said: ‘I do believe, of course, that poetry – well, there would be nothing more beautiful if it was true, if poets really believed everything they said. But quite often, those people are the most calculating of all. I know something about it, because a friend of mine was in love with a poet of sorts. In his poetry all he talked about was love, the sky, the stars. Oh, she was fooled all right! He did her out of more than three hundred thousand francs.’ If Swann then tried to teach her what artistic beauty was, how one should admire poetry or painting, after a moment she would stop listening, saying: ‘Yes… I didn’t imagine it was like that.’ And he would sense that she was feeling such disappointment that he would prefer to lie, telling her that what he had said was nothing, that it was only the least important part, that he did not have the time to go into things more deeply, that there was something else. 
But she would say to him sharply: ‘Something else? What?… Say it, then,’ but he would not say it, knowing how it would seem feeble to her and different from what she was hoping for, less sensational and less touching, and fearing that, disillusioned by art, she would at the same time be disillusioned by love.
And in fact she found Swann intellectually inferior to what she would have thought. 
‘You’re always so reserved. I can’t make you out.’ She would marvel more at his indifference to money, his kindness to everyone, his refinement. 
And it often happens, in fact, to greater men than Swann, to a scientist or an artist, when he is not misunderstood by those around him, that the feeling on their part which proves that the superiority of his intelligence has compelled their recognition is not their admiration for his ideas, since these are beyond them, but their respect for his goodness. 
Respect, too, was what was inspired in Odette by Swann’s position in society, but she did not want him to try to secure invitations for her. 
Perhaps she felt that he might not be successful, or was even afraid that merely by talking about her he would prompt revelations that she dreaded. 
In any case, she had made him promise never to utter her name. 
The reason she did not want to go into society, she had told him, was a quarrel she had once had with a friend who, to avenge herself, had then said bad things about her. 
Swann objected: ‘But not everyone knew your friend. – Well, yes, but these things get around. The world is cruel.’ Swann did not understand this story, but on the other hand he knew that such precepts – ‘The world is cruel,’ ‘a slanderous remark spreads like a drop of oil’ – were generally held to be true; there must be cases to which they applied. 
Was Odette’s one of them? 
He wondered about this, but not for long, because he too was subject to the mental torpor that had burdened his father, whenever he posed himself a difficult problem. 
Besides, this world which so frightened Odette did not, perhaps, inspire any great desire in her, because it was too far removed from the one she knew for her to picture it quite clearly to herself. 
However, while she had remained in certain respects truly simple (for example she had kept as her friend a solitary little seamstress, whose steep, dark and foul-smelling stair she climbed almost every day), she thirsted after fashion, but did not conceive of it in the same way as the fashionable people. 
For them, fashion is a thing that emanates from a small number of individuals who project it to a considerable distance – more and more faintly the farther one is from the centre of their closest associations – through the circle of their friends or the friends of their friends, whose names form a sort of register. 
Society people hold this register in their memory, they have an erudition about such matters, from which they have derived a sort of taste, a sort of discernment, so that if Swann, for example, read in a newspaper the names of the people who were at a dinner, he could immediately, without having to call upon his knowledge of the world, tell the exact degree of stylishness of that dinner, the way a literary person, simply by reading a sentence, can judge exactly the quality of its author. 
But Odette was one of those people (extremely numerous, whatever the fashionable people may think, and the like of which exists in every class of society) who do not share these notions, who imagine a stylishness that is quite different, that assumes different guises according to the circle to which they belong, but has the particular characteristic – whether it be the sort of stylishness Odette dreamed of, or the sort Mme Cottard worshipped – of being directly accessible to everyone. 
The other, the stylishness of the society people, is accessible too, in truth, but only after some lapse of time. 
Odette would say of someone:
And if Swann asked her what she meant by that, she would answer him a little scornfully:
– Why, smart places! 
My goodness! 
If at your age you need to be taught what the smart places are, I don’t know what to tell you. 
For example, the avenue de l’Impératrice37 on Sunday mornings, the Tour du Lac38 at five o’clock, the é den Théâtre39 on Thursdays, the Hippodrome40 on Friday, the balls…
But Swann in no way tried to make her change this conception of fashionable life; thinking that his own was no more real, was also foolish, unimportant, he saw no point in instructing her about it, so that after some months she had no interest in the people whose homes he went to except as a means of obtaining enclosure passes for horse-races or tickets to premières. 
She wanted him to cultivate useful relationships of that kind, but in other respects she was persuaded they were not very smart, after she saw the Marquise de Villeparisis go past her in the street wearing a black woollen dress and a bonnet with strings.
– Why, she looks like a working-class woman, darling, like an old concierge! 
That was a marquise! 
I’m no marquise, but you’d have to pay me handsomely to make me go about rigged out like that!
She could not understand why Swann lived in the house on the quai d’Orléans which, though she did not dare admit it to him, she found unworthy of him.
Of course she claimed she loved ‘antiques’ and assumed a rapturous and discriminating air when she said she adored spending a whole day ‘collecting curios’, looking for ‘bric-à-brac’, things ‘from the past’. 
Although it was a sort of point of honour in which she persisted (and in which she seemed to be obeying some family precept) that she should never answer questions or ‘account’ for how she spent her days, she talked to Swann once about a friend who had invited her to her house, where everything was ‘period’. 
But Swann could not manage to make her say what that period was. 
After some reflection, however, she answered that it was ‘medieval’. 
By this she meant that there was wood panelling. 
Some time later, she talked to him about her friend again and added, in the hesitant tone and with the knowing look with which you mention someone you have had dinner with the night before and whose name you never heard before, but whom your hosts seemed to consider someone so celebrated that you hope the person you are talking to will know who you are talking about: ‘Her dining-room… is… eighteenth-century!’ She had thought the room was hideous, bare, as if the house were not finished, the women looked hideous in it too and the fashion would never catch on. 
Finally, she talked about this again a third time and showed Swann the address of the man who had made that dining-room and whom she wanted to send for, when she had the money, to see if he could make one for her, not the same one, of course, but another which she was contemplating and which unfortunately the dimensions of her little house would not allow, one with tall sideboards, Renaissance furniture and fireplaces like the ones in the Château de Blois.41 
That day, she let slip in Swann’s presence what she thought of his home on the quai d’Orléans; because he had criticized the fact that Odette’s friend preferred, not Louis XVI, for, he said, even though that was not done, it could be charming, but the fake antique: ‘You wouldn’t want her to live the way you do, with your broken furniture and your threadbare carpets,’ she said to him, her bourgeois deference to public opinion prevailing, again, over her cocotte dilettantism.
People who liked collecting curios, who liked poetry, who were contemptuous of crass calculations, and dreamed of honour and love, she saw as an elite superior to the rest of humanity. 
One did not really have to have these predilections, provided one proclaimed them; of a man who had confessed to her at dinner that he loved to wander about the city, to get his hands dirty in the old shops, that he would never be appreciated by this commercial century, because he did not look after his own interests, and that because of this he belonged to another age, she returned home saying: ‘Why, he’s adorable, so sensitive, I never would have guessed!’ and she felt a sudden warm friendship for him. 
But on the other hand, men who, like Swann, had these tastes, but did not talk about them, left her cold. 
No doubt she had to admit that Swann did not value money, but she would add sulkily: ‘But with him, it’s not the same thing’; and in fact, what spoke to her imagination was not the practice of disinterestedness, but its vocabulary.
Realizing that he often failed to satisfy her dreams, he at least tried to see that she enjoyed being with him, not to oppose the vulgar ideas, the bad taste, which she displayed in all things, and which he loved, moreover, like everything else that emanated from her, which even enchanted him, for they were so many particular traits by which the woman’s essence appeared to him, became visible. 
And so, when she looked happy because she was going to La Reine Topaz,42 or when her gaze became serious, worried and petulant, because she was afraid of missing the flower show or merely of not being in time for tea, with muffins and toast,43 at the ‘Thé de la rue Royale’,44 regular attendance at which she believed was indispensable in establishing a woman’s reputation for elegance, Swann, enchanted as we are by the naturalness of a child or the truthfulness of a portrait that seems about to speak, sensed so clearly his mistress’s soul rising to the surface of her face that he could not resist going over to touch it with his lips. 
‘Ah! She wants to be taken to the flower show, little Odette, she wants to be admired, well then, we’ll take her, we must obey.’ Since Swann’s vision was rather poor, he had resigned himself to wearing glasses for working at home, and to adopting, for going out in the world, a monocle, which was less disfiguring. 
The first time she saw him with one in his eye, she could not contain her joy: ‘I really do think for a man it’s very smart! How it suits you! You look like a real gentleman. All you’re missing is a title!’ she added, with a touch of regret. 
He was happy that Odette was like this, just as, if he had been in love with a Breton woman, he would have enjoyed seeing her in a coiffe and hearing her tell him she believed in ghosts. 
Until then, as is true of many men whose taste for the arts develops independently from their sensuality, a bizarre disparity had existed between the satisfactions he conceded to one and those he conceded to the other, as he enjoyed, in the company of increasingly crude women, the seductions of increasingly refined works of art, taking a little housemaid to a closed orchestra box for the performance of a decadent play that he wanted to see or to an exhibition of Impressionist painting, and sure, in any case, that a cultivated woman of the world would not have understood any more about it, but would not have been able to keep quiet so nicely. 
But now that he loved Odette, to feel what she felt, to try to have but a single soul for the two of them, was so sweet to him that he tried to enjoy the things she liked, and his pleasure, not only in imitating her habits, but in adopting her opinions, was all the more profound because, since they had no roots in his own intelligence, they reminded him only of his love, because of which he preferred them. 
If he went to more than one performance of Serge Panine,45 if he sought out opportunities to go to see Olivier Métra46 conduct, it was for the sweetness of being initiated into all of Odette’s ideas, of feeling he was sharing equally in all her tastes. 
This charm of bringing him close to her, which was possessed by the works or the places that she liked, seemed to him more mysterious than the charm intrinsic in those that were lovelier but did not remind him of her. 
What was more, because he had allowed the intellectual beliefs of his youth to weaken, and because his scepticism as a man of the world had, unbeknownst to him, penetrated to them, he thought (or at least he had thought this for so long that he still said it) that the objects of our preferences do not have an absolute value in themselves, but that they all depend on one’s period, one’s social class, they are all merely fashions, the most vulgar of which are equal to those that pass for the most distinguished. 
And just as he believed that the importance Odette attached to having cards for the opening was not in itself a more ridiculous thing than the pleasure he used to take in lunching at the home of the Prince of Wales, likewise he did not think that the admiration she professed for Monte Carlo or for the Righi47 was more unreasonable than the fondness he himself felt for Holland, which she imagined to be ugly, or for Versailles, which she found dreary. 
And so he denied himself those places, pleased to tell himself that it was for her sake, that he wanted to feel things, love things, only with her.
Like everything else that was part of Odette’s environment and no more, in some sense, than a means by which he could see her, talk to her, he enjoyed the company of the Verdurins. 
There, because at the centre of all the amusements, meals, music, games, costumed suppers, excursions into the country, theatre parties, even the rare ‘grand soirées’ given for the ‘bores’, was the presence of Odette, the sight of Odette, conversation with Odette, of which the Verdurins gave to Swann, by inviting him, the inestimable gift, he was happier among the ‘little clan’ than anywhere else, and sought to attribute real merits to it, for by so doing he could imagine that, out of preference, he would associate with it all his life. 
For, since he did not dare to say to himself, afraid that he would not believe it, that he would always love Odette, at least by supposing that he would always associate with the Verdurins (a proposition that, a priori, raised fewer objections of principle on the part of his intelligence), he could see himself in the future continuing to meet Odette every evening; this did not perhaps quite amount to the same thing as always loving her, but for the moment, while he loved her, to believe that he would not stop seeing her one day was all that he asked. 
‘What a charming place, he would say to himself. How fundamentally real their life is! How much more intelligent, more artistic, they are there than high-society people! How sincere, despite some rather absurd little exaggerations, is Mme Verdurin’s love of painting, music – what a passion she has for works of art, and how she longs to please artists! The notion she has formed of society people is not accurate; but then again, society’s notion of artistic circles is even more false! Perhaps I make no very great intellectual demands in conversation, but I’m perfectly happy with Cottard though he does make inept puns. And as for the painter, his pretentiousness may be unpleasant when he’s trying to surprise people, but on the other hand he has one of the finest minds I’ve ever known. And also, most of all, you feel free there, you do what you like without feeling constrained, without standing on ceremony. What a quantity of good humour is expended every day in that drawing-room! Decidedly, apart from a few rare exceptions, I will never go anywhere else. More and more, that is where I will find my companionship and live my life.’
And since the qualities that he believed to be intrinsic to the Verdurins were merely the reflection of the pleasures he enjoyed in their house because of his love for Odette, those qualities became more serious, more profound, more vital, along with those pleasures. 
Because Mme Verdurin sometimes gave Swann the only thing that could constitute happiness for him; because, on a certain evening when he felt anxious because Odette had been talking to one guest more than another, and when, irritated at her, he did not want to take the initiative of asking her if she would return home with him, Mme Verdurin brought him peace and joy by saying spontaneously: ‘Odette, you will take M. Swann home, won’t you?’; because, when summer was approaching, and he had at first wondered uneasily if Odette would be going away without him, if he could continue to see her every day, Mme Verdurin invited them both to spend it at her home in the country – Swann, unconsciously allowing gratitude and self-interest to infiltrate into his intelligence and influence his ideas, went so far as to proclaim that Mme Verdurin was the soul of high-mindedness. 
Apropos of a few delightful or eminent people whom one of his old classmates from the é cole du Louvre might mention to him, he would respond: ‘I prefer the Verdurins a hundred times over.’ And, with a solemnity that was new to him: ‘They are magnanimous creatures, and magnanimity is, fundamentally, the only thing that matters and that gives us distinction here on earth. You know, there are only two classes of people: the magnanimous ones and all the rest; and when you reach my age you have to choose, you have to decide once and for all whom you intend to like and whom you intend to despise, stick with the ones you like and, so as to make up for the time you’ve wasted with the others, not leave them again until you die. Well!’ he added with that slight emotion you feel when, even without fully realizing it, you say something not because it is true, but because you enjoy saying it and you listen to it in your own voice as if it came from somewhere other than from yourself, ‘the die is cast, I have chosen to like only magnanimous hearts and to live from now on only in magnanimity. You ask me if Mme Verdurin is truly intelligent. I assure you that she has given me proof of a nobility of heart, of a loftiness of soul which, you know, can’t be attained without an equal loftiness of mind. Certainly she has a profound intelligence where the arts are concerned. But perhaps this is not her most admirable quality; and a small action, an ingeniously, exquisitely good one, that she has performed for me, a genial attention, a familiarly sublime gesture, reveal a more profound understanding of life than any philosophical treatise.’
Yet he could have said to himself that there were old friends of his parents just as simple as the Verdurins, friends of his youth as smitten with art, that he knew other great-hearted people, and that nevertheless, now that he had opted for simplicity, the arts and magnanimity, he never saw them any more. 
But these people did not know Odette, and, if they had known her, would never have thought of bringing the two of them together.
And so doubtless there was not, in the whole Verdurin circle, a single faithful partisan who liked them or thought he liked them as much as Swann. 
And yet, when M. Verdurin had said he did not much care for Swann, he was not only expressing his own thoughts, but also guessing his wife’s. 
Doubtless Swann’s affection for Odette was too private and he had neglected to make Mme Verdurin his daily confidante concerning it; doubtless the very discretion with which he had made use of the Verdurins’ hospitality, often refraining from coming to dinner for a reason that they did not suspect and in place of which they saw a desire not to turn down an invitation to the home of some ‘bores’, doubtless, too, and despite all the precautions he had taken to hide it from them, their gradual discovery of his brilliant position in society, all fed their irritation with him. 
But the deeper reason for it was different. 
It was that they had very quickly sensed in him a reserved, impenetrable space, where he continued to profess silently to himself that the Princesse de Sagan was not grotesque and that Cottard’s jokes were not funny, in the end, and, even though he never deviated from his affability and never rebelled against their dogmas, an impossibility of imposing them on him, of wholly converting him to them, the like of which they had never encountered before in anyone. 
They would have forgiven him for associating with bores (to whom, for that matter, in his heart of hearts, he preferred the Verdurins and the whole of the little clan a thousand times over), if he had consented, as a good example, to renounce them in the presence of the faithful. 
But this was an abjuration they understood could not be wrung from him.
How different from a ‘newcomer’ whom Odette had asked them to invite, though she had not met him more a few times, and in whom they invested many hopes: the Comte de Forcheville! 
(It turned out that in fact he was Saniette’s brother-in-law, which filled the faithful with surprise: the old archivist’s manners were so humble that they had always thought he was from a social rank inferior to theirs and did not expect to learn that he belonged to a world that was rich and relatively aristocratic.) 
True, Forcheville was grossly snobbish, whereas Swann was not; true, he did not even dream of placing the circle of the Verdurins above all others, as Swann did. 
But he did not have the natural delicacy that stopped Swann from joining in with the too manifestly false criticisms that Mme Verdurin leveled against people he knew. 
As for the vulgar and pretentious tirades the painter launched into on certain days, and as for the travelling-salesman jokes that Cottard ventured, for which Swann, who liked both men, could easily find excuses without having the heart or the hypocrisy to applaud them, Forcheville by contrast was of an intellectual calibre that allowed him to be dumbfounded, awestruck by the first, though he did not understand them, and to delight in the second. 
And in fact the first dinner at the Verdurins’ at which Forcheville was present exposed all these differences, brought out his qualities and precipitated Swann’s fall from grace.
At this dinner there was, besides the regulars, a professor from the Sorbonne, Brichot, who had met M. and Mme Verdurin at the spa and, if his duties at the university and his scholarly work had not given him very few hours of freedom, would willingly have come to their house often. 
For he had that curiosity, that excessive interest in life which, when combined with a degree of scepticism concerning the object of their studies, gives certain intelligent men in any profession, doctors who do not believe in medicine, schoolteachers who do not believe in Latin compositions, a reputation for having minds that are broad, brilliant and even superior. 
At Mme Verdurin’s, he made a point of seeking his illustrations in whatever was most up-to-date when he spoke of philosophy and history, principally because he thought such subjects were only a preparation for real life and he imagined he would find put into practice by the little clan what he had known before now only from books, and then perhaps also because, having had instilled in him in the past, and having preserved without knowing it, a respect for certain subjects, he believed he was casting off his academic tendencies by taking liberties with them which, on the contrary, appeared such to him only because he had remained an academic.
At the very beginning of the meal, when M. de Forcheville, placed to the right of Mme Verdurin, who had gone to great trouble over her appearance so as to please the ‘newcomer’, said to her: ‘Quite original, that white dress,’ the doctor, who had been steadily observing him, so curious was he to find out what sort of man a ‘de’, as he termed it, would be, and who was looking for a chance of attracting his attention and entering into closer contact with him, seized on the word ‘blanche’ and, without lifting his nose from his plate, said: ‘blanche? Blanche de Castille?’,48 then, without moving his head, cast his eyes furtively to the right and left with an uncertain, smiling look. 
Whereas Swann, with his painful and useless attempt at a smile, revealed how stupid he thought the pun was, Forcheville had shown both that he relished its subtlety and that he had good manners, by containing within judicious limits a gaiety whose frankness had charmed Mme Verdurin.
– What do you make of our man of science? 
she had asked Forcheville. 
It’s impossible to have even two minutes of serious conversation with him. 
Is that the sort of thing you say to them at your hospital?
’ she had added, turning to the doctor. 
‘It must be rather lively there, if that’s the case. I see I’ll have to get them to admit me as a patient.
– Who is this gentleman? 
Forcheville asked Mme Verdurin. 
He seems first-rate.
– What? 
You haven’t heard of the famous Brichot? 
Why, he’s celebrated all over Europe.
– Oh! 
So that’s Bréchot! cried Forcheville, who had not heard the name clearly. 
You must tell me all about him, he added, staring wide-eyed at the famous man. 
It’s always interesting to have dinner with a prominent person. 
But I must say, you certainly give your guests some choice dinner-mates. 
No one’s likely to get bored in your house.
– Oh, you know, the most important thing, Mme Verdurin said modestly, is that they know they can trust us. 
They can talk about whatever they like, and the conversation is off and running. 
For instance, now, take Brichot. 
This is nothing: I’ve seen him, you know, when he’s been absolutely dazzling here in my house, you feel you ought to go down on your knees in front of him. 
Well, now, at other people’s houses, he’s not the same man, he hasn’t a scrap of wit, you have to force the words out of him, he’s actually boring.
A wit like Brichot’s would have been considered pure stupidity by the people among whom Swann had spent his youth, even though it might be compatible with real intelligence. 
And the professor’s intelligence, vigorous and well nourished, probably would have been envied by many of the society people whom Swann considered witty. 
But those people had inculcated him so thoroughly with their own likes and dislikes, at least concerning anything to do with society life, including even that annexed part of it which should, instead, belong to the domain of intelligence – namely, conversation – that Swann could only find Brichot’s jokes pedantic, vulgar and sickeningly coarse. 
Then, too, being so accustomed to good manners, he was shocked by the rough military tone affected, each time he addressed anyone, by the jingoistic academic. 
Finally, perhaps he had lost some of his indulgence that evening in particular, seeing the friendliness Mme Verdurin displayed towards this man Forcheville whom Odette had had the singular idea of bringing. 
A little ill at ease with Swann, she had asked him when she arrived:
And he, realizing for the first time that Forcheville, whom he had known for a long time, might be attractive to a woman and was a rather handsome man, had answered: ‘Disgusting!’ Of course, it did not occur to him to be jealous of Odette, but he did not feel as happy as usual and when Brichot, having begun to tell the story of Blanche de Castille’s mother, who ‘had been with Henry Plantagenet50 for years before she married him’, tried to prompt Swann to ask him what happened next by saying to him: ‘Isn’t that so, Monsieur Swann?’ in the martial tone one adopts to make oneself understood by a peasant or instil courage in a soldier, Swann spoiled Brichot’s effect, to the fury of their hostess, by answering that they must please excuse him for being so uninterested in Blanche de Castille, but he had something to ask the painter. 
That afternoon, in fact, the latter had gone to see the show of a friend of Mme Verdurin’s, an artist who had died recently, and Swann wanted to find out from him (for he respected his taste) if there really was even more in these last works than the virtuosity that was already so astounding in the earlier ones.
– In that respect it was extraordinary, but it didn’t seem to me to be an art that was, as they say, all that ‘elevated’, said Swann, smiling.
– Elevated… to the height of an institution, interrupted Cottard, lifting his arms with mock gravity.
– Didn’t I tell you? 
He won’t allow anyone to be serious, said Mme Verdurin to Forcheville. 
Just when you least expect it, he comes out with a pun.
But she noticed that Swann alone had not brightened up. 
What was more, he was not very pleased that Cottard had made fun of him in front of Forcheville. 
But the painter, instead of answering Swann in an interesting way, which he probably would have done if he had been alone with him, preferred to win the admiration of the guests by contributing a little set piece on the skill of the deceased master.
– I went up to one of them, he said, just to see how it was done. 
I stuck my nose into it. 
Well! 
Gospel truth! 
Impossible to say whether it was done with glue, or rubies, or soap, or sunshine, or leaven, or bronze, or caca!
– And one makes twelve, cried the doctor, too late, so that no one understood his interruption.
– The thing looked as though it were made with nothing at all, the painter went on; absolutely no way of discovering the trick, any more than in La Ronde de Nuit or Les Régentes, and the brushwork is even stronger than Rembrandt or Hals.51 
It’s got everything in it – no, I swear.
And just as singers who have reached the highest note they can sing continue in falsetto, softly, he confined himself to murmuring, and smiling, as if in fact the painting had been absurdly beautiful:
– It smells good, it goes to your head, it takes your breath away, it tickles you, and you haven’t a hope of knowing what it’s made with, it’s some kind of sorcery, it’s a trick, it’s a miracle (bursting fully into laughter): it’s dishonest!
’ And stopping, gravely lifting his head, adopting a deep bass note which he tried to make harmonious, he added: ‘and it’s so loyal!’
Except at the moment when he had said: ‘stronger than La Ronde de Nuit’, a blasphemy that had provoked a protest from Mme Verdurin, who considered La Ronde de Nuit the greatest masterpiece in the world along with the Ninth and the Winged Victory,52 and at ‘made with caca’, which had caused Forcheville to cast a circular glance at the table to see if the word was acceptable and had then brought to his mouth a prudish and conciliatory smile, all the guests except for Swann had fastened their eyes on the painter with gazes hypnotized by admiration.
– How he amuses me when he gets carried away like that, cried Mme Verdurin when he was finished, delighted that the table was so interesting on the very day when M. de Forcheville had come for the first time. 
And what about you, what’s the matter with you, letting your mouth hang open that way like some great dog? 
she said to her husband. 
You know very well how he can talk; it’s as if my husband had never heard you before. 
If only you could have seen the way he looked while you were talking, he was drinking you in. 
And tomorrow he’ll repeat everything you said without losing a word.
– But it’s no joke, said the painter, enchanted with his success, you seem to think I’m giving you a sales-talk, you think it’s all a sham; I’ll take you there to see for yourself, then you’ll decide whether I’m exaggerating. 
I’ll bet your boots you’ll come back even more enthusiastic than I was!
– But we don’t think you’re exaggerating, we just want you to eat your dinner, and we want my husband to eat too; give Monsieur some more sole normande, you can see that his is cold. 
We’re not in such a hurry as all that, you’re serving as if the house were on fire, now wait a little before you bring in the salad.
Mme Cottard, who was modest and did not talk much, did not lack self-assurance when a happy inspiration caused her to hit upon a suitable remark. 
She felt that it would have some success, this gave her confidence, and what she did with it was not so much in order to shine as to be useful to her husband’s career. 
And so she did not allow the word ‘salad’ to escape after it was spoken by Mme Verdurin.
– That wouldn’t be Japanese salad, would it? 
she said softly, turning to Odette.
And delighted and abashed by the appropriateness and boldness of making this allusion, so discreet, yet so clear, to Dumas’s astonishing new play,53 she burst into the charming laughter of a naïf, not very noisy, but so irresistible that for a few moments she could not control it. 
‘Who is that lady? She’s a lively one,’ said Forcheville.
– No, it’s not, but we’ll have some for you if you’ll all come to dine with us on Friday.
And imagining that it was perhaps because he did not like Francillon :
– Anyway, I think I’ll be disappointed. 
I don’t think it’s as good as Serge Panine, which Mme de Crécy worships so. 
In that one, at least, there are deep things that make you think; but to give a recipe for salad on the stage of the Théâtre-Français! 
Whereas Serge Panine! 
But then, it’s like everything that comes from Georges Ohnet’s pen, it’s always so well written. 
I don’t know if you know Le Maître de Forges, which I like even better than Serge Panine.
– Forgive me, Swann said to her with irony, but I confess that my lack of admiration is almost equally divided between the two masterpieces.
– Really, what have you got against them? 
Are you sure you aren’t prejudiced? 
Do you think perhaps they’re a little dreary? 
Anyway, as I always say, one should never argue about novels or plays. 
Everyone has his own way of looking at things and what you find detestable may be the very thing I like best.
She was interrupted by Forcheville addressing Swann. 
In fact, while Mme Cottard was talking about Francillon, Forcheville had told Mme Verdurin how much he admired what he called the painter’s little ‘speech’.54
– The gentleman has a facility for speaking, a memory, he had said to Mme Verdurin when the painter was finished, such as I have rarely encountered! 
By my bootlaces! 
I’d love to have such a gift. 
He would make an excellent preacher. 
One may say that with him and M. Bréchot, you have two real characters, one as good as the other, though for gift of the gab I’m not even sure this one would not in fact spike the professor’s guns. 
It comes out more naturally, it’s less studied. 
Although now and then he does use words that are a bit on the vulgar side, but that’s the thing to do nowadays. 
It’s not often that I’ve seen anyone hold the floor so cleverly – ‘hold the spittoon’, as we used to say in the regiment, and come to think of it, it was in the regiment that I had a friend the gentleman rather reminded me of. 
Apropos of anything, I don’t know what, this glass, for instance, he could rattle on for hours; no, not about this glass, that’s a silly thing to say; but about the Battle of Waterloo, anything you like, and he would throw in things you never would have thought of. 
Why, Swann was in the same regiment; he must have known him.
– Oh no, answered M. de Forcheville, and since in order to get to know Odette more easily he wanted to be pleasant to Swann, he attempted to seize this opportunity of flattering him by talking about his distinguished friends, but talking about them as a man of the world, in the tone of an affectionate critic and not as though he were congratulating him as on an unhoped-for success: ‘Isn’t it so, Swann? I never see you. Anyway, how could I ever see him? The man is always hanging about with the La Trémoïlles,55 with the Laumes, people like that!…’ An imputation especially false, since, for a year now, Swann had hardly gone anywhere but to the Verdurins’. 
But the mere name of a person they did not know was greeted by a reproving silence on their part. 
M. Verdurin, afraid of the painful impression that these names of ‘bores’, especially when tactlessly hurled thus in the faces of all the faithful, must have produced on his wife, secretly cast at her a glance full of worried solicitude. 
He saw then that in her resolution not to take action, not to have been affected by the news that had just been announced to her, not merely to remain dumb but to have been deaf as well, the way we pretend to be deaf when a friend who has offended us tries to slip into the conversation an excuse which we would seem to accept if we listened to it without protesting, or when someone utters in our presence the forbidden name of an ingrate, Mme Verdurin, so that her silence would not seem to be a form of consent, but rather the ignorant silence of an inanimate object, had suddenly divested her face of all life, all mobility; her prominent forehead was now merely a lovely study in the round, which the name of those La Trémoïlles at whose house Swann was always hanging about had not been able to penetrate; her slightly wrinkled nose revealed an indentation that seemed copied from life. 
Her half-open mouth seemed about to speak. 
She was now merely a lost wax, a plaster mask, a model for a monument, a bust for the Palais de l’Industrie56 in front of which the public would certainly stop to admire how the sculptor, by expressing the indefeasible dignity of the Verdurins as opposed to that of the La Trémoïlles and the Laumes, whose equals they naturally were, as they were the equals of all the bores on earth, had managed to give an almost papal majesty to the whiteness and rigidity of the stone. 
But at last the marble came to life and insinuated that one could not be squeamish if one wanted to go to the homes of these people, because the wife was always drunk and the husband so ignorant that he said ‘collidor’ instead of ‘corridor’.
– You’d have to pay me handsomely before I’d let that sort enter my house, concluded Mme Verdurin, looking at Swann with an imperious air.
She probably did not hope that he would be submissive enough to imitate the saintly simplicity of the pianist’s aunt, who had just exclaimed: ‘You see that? What astonishes me is that there’s still people who’ll speak to them! I think I would be too afraid: once struck, out of luck! How can there still be folks low enough to go running after them?’ but that he would at least answer like Forcheville: ‘Lord, she’s a duchess; some people are still impressed by that,’ which had at least allowed Mme Verdurin to reply: ‘Much good may it do them!’ Instead of that, Swann merely laughed with an air that signified that he could not even take such extravagant nonsense seriously. 
M. Verdurin, continuing to cast furtive glances at his wife, saw with sadness and understood all too well that she was feeling the rage of a grand inquisitor who cannot manage to extirpate the heresy, and in order to try to lead Swann to a recantation, since the courage of one’s convictions always seems to be a calculation and an act of cowardice in the eyes of those who do not share them, M. Verdurin challenged him:
– Now tell us frankly what you think of them, we won’t repeat it to them.
– Why, it’s not in the least out of fear of the duchess (if you’re talking about the La Trémoïlles). 
I assure you everyone likes to visit her. 
I’m not saying she’s ‘profound’ – (he pronounced ‘profound’ as if it were a ridiculous word, because his language still bore the trace of habits of mind which his recent rejuvenation, marked by a love of music, had temporarily made him lose – so that at times he now expressed his opinions warmly –) but I’m quite sincere when I say that she’s intelligent and her husband is truly well-read. 
They’re charming people.
Whereupon Mme Verdurin, feeling that because of this one infidel she would be prevented from creating a complete moral unanimity among the little clan, was unable to stop herself, in her rage against this stubborn man who did not see how much his words were making her suffer, from crying out to him from the depths of her heart:
– Believe it if you like, but at least don’t say it to us.
– It all depends on what you call intelligence, said Forcheville, who felt it was his turn to shine. 
Now, Swann, what do you mean by intelligence?
– There you are! exclaimed Odette. 
That’s the sort of big subject I’m always asking him to talk to me about, but he never will.
– As you see it, Forcheville went on, does intelligence mean a gift of the gab, does it have to do with how people manage to worm their way in?
– Finish up so they can take your plate, said Mme Verdurin sourly, turning to Saniette, who, absorbed in thought, had stopped eating. 
And perhaps a little ashamed of the tone she had taken: Never mind, take your time, I only said it for the sake of the others, because it holds up the next course.
– There is, said Brichot, rapping out the syllables, a very curious definition of intelligence in that gentle anarchist, Fénelon57…
– Listen! said Mme Verdurin to Forcheville and the doctor. 
‘He’s going to give us Fénelon’s definition of intelligence. Now that’s interesting. It’s not often you have a chance of hearing that.’
But Brichot was waiting for Swann to give his own definition. 
Swann did not answer, and by avoiding them like this spoiled the brilliant contest that Mme Verdurin was so delighted to be able to offer Forcheville.
– Naturally. 
He’s just like that with me all the time, said Odette sulkily. 
I’m glad to see I’m not the only one he doesn’t think is up to his level.
– Those de la Trémouailles,58 who are so little to be recommended, as Mme Verdurin has shown us, asked Brichot with powerfully clear articulation, are they descended from the folk whom Mme de Sévigné, that good snob, admitted she was pleased to know because it was good for her peasants? 
Of course, the marquise had another reason, and one that had to be more important to her, for as a woman of letters through and through, she put copy before all else. 
Now in the journal she used to send regularly to her daughter, it was Mme de la Trémouaille, kept well informed by her great connections, who supplied the foreign politics.
– Why, no, I don’t think it’s the same family, ventured Mme Verdurin.
Saniette, who, after hurriedly giving the butler his plate, which was still full, had plunged back into a meditative silence, emerged from it at last to tell them with a smile the story of a dinner he had attended with the Duc de La Trémoïlle at which it turned out that the Duc did not know George Sand was the pseudonym of a woman. 
Swann, who was fond of Saniette, thought he ought to supply him with a few particulars about the Duc’s culture proving that such ignorance on the Duc’s part was materially impossible; but suddenly he stopped, realizing that Saniette did not need those proofs and knew the story was untrue for the simple reason that he had just invented it a moment ago. 
That excellent man suffered from being thought such a bore by the Verdurins; and, aware that he had been even duller than usual at this dinner, he had not wanted to let it end before he succeeded in amusing them. 
He capitulated so quickly, looked so unhappy at seeing that the effect on which he had counted had failed, and answered Swann in such a pitiful tone so that Swann would not persist in a refutation that was henceforth pointless – ‘All right, all right; and if I’m mistaken it’s not a crime, I hope,’ that Swann would have liked to be able to say the story was true and delightful. 
The doctor, who had been listening to them, thought this was the moment to say: Se non èvero,59 but he was not sure quite sure of the words and was afraid of getting muddled.
– She must not have been too bad at one time, Mme Verdurin, and she’s a woman you can talk to; for me that’s everything. 
Of course she’s beginning to get a bit long in the tooth. 
But Mme de Crécy – now there’s a little woman who seems intelligent – oh yes, by God, you can see at a glance that she keeps her eyes peeled! 
We’re talking about Mme de Crécy, he said to M. Verdurin, who was approaching, his pipe in his mouth. 
I would imagine that as a specimen of the female figure…
– I’d rather have it in my bed than a slap with a wet fish, Cottard rushed to say, having waited in vain for some moments for Forcheville to pause for breath so that he could insert that old joke, which he feared would not be appropriate again if the conversation changed course, and which he delivered with that excess of spontaneity and assurance which attempts to mask the coldness and anxiety inseparable from a recitation. 
Forcheville was familiar with the joke, he understood it and was amused by it. 
As for M. Verdurin, he was unsparing with his mirth, because he had recently discovered a signal for expressing it different from the one used by his wife, but just as simple and clear. 
Scarcely had he begun the movement of head and shoulders of a person shaking with laughter than he would immediately begin coughing as if, in laughing too hard, he had swallowed smoke from his pipe. 
And still keeping the pipe in one corner of his mouth, he would indefinitely prolong the pantomime of suffocation and hilarity. 
Thus he and Mme Verdurin, who, across from him, listening to the painter tell her a story, was closing her eyes before dropping her face into her hands, looked like two theatre masks each in its own way representing merriment.
M. Verdurin had in fact been wise not to withdraw his pipe from his mouth, for Cottard, who needed to leave the room for a moment, made a joke under his breath that he had learned recently and that he repeated each time he had to go to the same place: ‘I must absent myself for a moment in aid of the Duc d’Aumale,’60 so that M. Verdurin’s fit began again.
– Take your pipe out of your mouth. 
Can’t you see you’re going to choke to death trying not to laugh? 
Mme Verdurin said to him as she came around offering the liqueurs.
– How charming your husband is, he has wit enough for four, declared Forcheville to Mme Cottard. 
Thank you, Madame. 
An old soldier like me never refuses a drop.
– M. de Forcheville thinks Odette is charming, said M. Verdurin to his wife.
– Why, actually she would like to come to lunch with you some time. 
We’re going to contrive to make it happen, but Swann mustn’t hear of it. 
You know, he puts rather a damper on things. 
That won’t mean you shouldn’t come to dinner, of course, we hope to have you very often. 
With summer coming, we’ll be dining outdoors quite frequently. 
That won’t bore you, will it – little dinners in the Bois? 
Good, good, it’ll be very nice. 
You! 
Aren’t you going to go do your job, now?
’ she cried out to the little pianist, in order to display, in front of a newcomer as important as Forcheville, both her wit and her tyrannical power over the faithful.
– M. de Forcheville was saying bad things to me about you, said Mme Cottard to her husband when he returned to the drawing-room.
And he, pursuing the idea of Forcheville’s noble lineage, which had preoccupied him from the beginning of dinner, said to him:
– I’m treating a baroness just now, Baronne Putbus;61 the Putbuses took part in the Crusades, didn’t they? 
They have a lake in Pomerania that’s so big it must be ten times the size of the place de la Concorde. 
I’m treating her for rheumatoid arthritis; she’s a charming woman. 
In fact she knows Mme Verdurin, I believe.
Which allowed Forcheville, finding himself, a moment later, alone with Mme Cottard, to complete the favourable judgment that he had passed on her husband:
– And he’s so interesting, you can tell he knows a few people. 
Lord, these doctors know such a lot!
– I’m going to play the phrase from the sonata for M. Swann, said the pianist.
– My God! 
I trust it’s not the ‘sonata-snake’?
62 asked M. de Forcheville to create an effect.
But Doctor Cottard, who had never heard that pun, did not understand it and thought M. de Forcheville was making a mistake. 
He went up to them briskly to correct it:
– No, no, it’s not serpent à sonates, it’s serpent à sonnettes, he said in a tone that was zealous, impatient and triumphant.
Forcheville explained the pun to him. 
The doctor blushed.
– Oh, I’ve known it for too long, answered Cottard.
But they fell silent; under the agitation of the violin tremolos protecting it with their quivering extended two octaves above – and as in a mountainous countryside, behind the apparent and vertiginous immobility of a waterfall one sees, two hundred feet down, the minuscule form of a woman walking – the little phrase had just appeared, distant, graceful, protected by the long unfurling of its transparent, ceaseless curtain of sound. 
And Swann, in his heart, appealed to it as to a confidant of his love, as to a friend of Odette’s who certainly should tell her to pay no attention to that Forcheville.
– Ah, you’re late! said Mme Verdurin to a regular whom she had invited only ‘for coffee’, ‘Brichot was incomparable – so eloquent! But he’s gone. Isn’t that right, Monsieur Swann? I believe it was the first time you and he had met, she said in order to point out to him that she was the one to whom he owed the introduction. Wasn’t our Brichot delicious?
– No? 
He didn’t interest you? 
Mme Verdurin asked him curtly.
– Why, of course, Madame, very much, I was delighted. 
He is perhaps a little peremptory and a little jovial for my taste. 
I would like to see some hesitation, some gentleness now and then, but one senses that he knows so many things and he seems like an all-round decent man.
Everyone went home very late. 
Cottard’s first words to his wife were:
– I’ve rarely seen Mme Verdurin as spirited as she was this evening.
– What exactly is this Mme Verdurin of yours, rather a mixed bag of goods? 
said Forcheville to the painter, whom he had invited to ride with him.
Odette watched with regret as he went off; she did not dare decline to ride with Swann, but was in a bad mood in the carriage, and when he asked her if he ought to come in, she said, ‘Of course,’ shrugging her shoulders impatiently. 
When all the guests had gone, Mme Verdurin said to her husband:
– Did you notice how Swann laughed foolishly when we were talking about Mme La Trémoïlle?
’
She had noticed that several times, when saying this name, Swann and Forcheville had omitted the particle. 
Having no doubt that they did this to show they were not intimidated by titles, she wanted to imitate their pride, but had not fully understood by which grammatical form it was expressed. 
And so her incorrect way of speaking won out over her republican intransigence, and she still said ‘the de la Trémoïlles’ or rather, using an abbreviation current in the words of the café songs and caricature captions, which swallowed the de, ‘the d’La Trémoïlles’, but she made up for it by saying: ‘Madame La Trémoïlle’. 
‘The Duchesse, as Swann calls her,’ she added ironically with a smile which proved she was only quoting and did not accept responsibility for so naïve and ridiculous a denomination.
– He’s not direct, he’s cunning, always betwixt and between. 
He’s a fellow who’s always wanting to run with the hare and hunt with the hounds. 
How different from Forcheville! 
There’s a man who at least tells you fair and square what he’s thinking. 
You either agree with him or you don’t. 
He’s not like the other, neither fish nor fowl. 
Anyway, Odette really seems to prefer Forcheville, and I think she’s right. 
And then, also, since Swann wants to play the society man with us, defender of duchesses, at least the other has his own title; he’s still the Comte de Forcheville, he added delicately, as if, well informed about the history of that dignity, he was scrupulously weighing its particular value.
– I must tell you, said Mme Verdurin, that he felt called upon to direct some venomous and quite ridiculous insinuations against Brichot. 
Naturally, since he saw that Brichot was well liked in this house, it was a way of attacking us, of disparaging our dinner-party. 
What I suspect is he’s the sort of good friend who badmouths you on his way out.
– But that’s what I told you, answered M. Verdurin. 
He’s a typical failure, the little fellow envious of anything that’s at all big.
In reality there was not one of the faithful who was not more malicious than Swann; but they all took care to season their slander with familiar jokes, with little hints of anxiety and cordiality; whereas the slightest reserve that Swann allowed himself, omitting such conventional formulas as, ‘Now I don’t mean to say anything bad,’ to which he did not deign to stoop, seemed perfidious. 
There are authors of true originality in whom the least boldness offends because they have not first flattered the tastes of the public and have not served it the commonplaces which it is used to; it was in the same way that Swann roused M. Verdurin’s indignation. 
In Swann’s case as in theirs, it was the novelty of his language that convinced one of the darkness of his intentions.
Swann was still unaware of the disgrace that threatened him at the Verdurins’ and continued to regard all their absurdities in a favourable light, with the eyes of his love.
Most of the time, at least, he met Odette only in the evening; but during the day, though he was afraid of causing her to become tired of him by going to her house, he wanted at least not to cease to occupy her thoughts and was always looking for an opportunity of involving himself in them, but in a way that would be pleasant for her. 
If, in the window of a florist or a jeweller, the sight of a shrub or a jewel charmed him, instantly he would think of sending them to Odette, imagining that the pleasure they had given him would be felt by her too, increasing her affection for him, and he would immediately have them delivered to the rue La Pérouse so as not to delay the moment when, because she was receiving something from him, he would feel he was in some way close to her. 
He especially wanted her to receive them before she went out so that the gratitude she felt would win him a more tender welcome when she saw him at the Verdurins’, or even – who knows? 
– if the shopkeeper was prompt enough, perhaps a letter which she would send him before dinner, or her arrival in person at his house, in a supplementary visit to thank him. 
Just as he had once tested Odette’s nature for reactions of resentment, so now he sought by reactions of gratitude to extract from her intimate particles of feeling that she had not yet revealed to him.
Often, she had money troubles and, hard pressed by a debt, would ask him for help. 
He was happy about that, as about everything that could give Odette a strong impression of the love he had for her, or simply a strong impression of his influence, of how useful he could be to her. 
No doubt if someone had said to him in the beginning: ‘It’s your position that attracts her,’ and now: ‘It’s because of your wealth that she loves you,’ he would not have believed it, and would also not have minded very much that people imagined she was attached to him – that people felt they were joined together – by something as powerful as snobbishness or money. 
But, even if he had thought it was true, perhaps he would not have been hurt by discovering within Odette’s love for him that mainstay more durable than his charm or the qualities she might find in him: namely, self-interest, a self-interest that would prevent the day ever coming when she would be tempted to stop seeing him. 
For the moment, by overwhelming her with presents, by doing her favours, he could rely upon advantages extrinsic to his person, his intelligence, to take over from him the exhausting responsibility of pleasing her by himself. 
And as for the voluptuous pleasure of being in love, of living by love alone, the reality of which he doubted at times, it was increased in value for him, as dilettante of immaterial sensations, by the price he was paying her for it – as we see people uncertain whether the sight of the sea and the sound of its waves are delightful, convince themselves of it and also of the exceptional quality and disinterest of their own taste, by paying a hundred francs a day for a hotel room that allows them to enjoy that sight and that sound.
One day when reflections of this kind were leading him back once again to the memory of the time when people had talked to him about Odette as a kept woman, and when he was amusing himself yet again by contrasting that strange personification, the kept woman – an iridescent amalgam of unfamiliar and diabolical elements, set, like some apparition by Gustave Moreau,63 among venomous flowers interwoven with precious jewels – with the Odette on whose face he had seen the same feelings of pity for a sufferer, revolt against an injustice, gratitude for a favour, that he had seen in earlier days on his own mother’s face and on the faces of his friends, the Odette whose conversation had so often turned on the things he knew best himself, on his collections, his room, his old servant, the banker who looked after his securities, it happened that this last image of the banker reminded him that he would have to call on him soon to draw some money. 
In fact, if this month he was less liberal when helping Odette out of her material difficulties than he had been the month before when he had given her five thousand francs, and if he did not present her with a diamond rivière that she wanted, he would not reawaken her admiration for his generosity, her gratitude, which made him so happy, and he would even risk making her think that his love for her, as she saw its manifestations become less abundant, had diminished. 
Then, suddenly, he wondered if this was not precisely what was meant by ‘keeping’ her (as if, in fact, this notion of keeping could be derived from elements not at all mysterious or perverse but belonging to the intimate substance of his daily life, like that thousand-franc bill, domestic and familiar, torn and reglued, which his valet, after having paid the month’s accounts and the quarter’s rent for him, had locked in the drawer of the old desk from which Swann had taken it out again to send it with four others to Odette) and if one could not apply to Odette, starting from when he had come to know her (because he did not for a moment suspect that she could ever have received money from anyone before him), those words which he had believed so irreconcilable with her – ‘kept woman’. 
He could not study this idea in greater depth, because an attack of that mental laziness which in him was congenital, intermittent and providential, happened at that moment to extinguish all light in his intelligence, as abruptly as, later, when electric lighting had been installed everywhere, one could cut off the electricity in a house. 
His mind groped for a moment in the darkness, he took off his glasses, wiped the lenses, passed his hand over his eyes, and saw the light again only when he found himself in the presence of an entirely different idea, namely that he ought to try to send six or seven thousand frances to Odette next month instead of five, because of the surprise and pleasure it would give her.
In the evening, when he did not stay at home waiting for the hour when he would meet Odette at the Verdurins’ or rather in one of the summer restaurants they favoured in the Bois and especially at Saint-Cloud, he would go and dine in one of those elegant houses where he had once been a habitual guest at table. 
He did not want to lose touch with people who – one never could tell – might perhaps be useful to Odette one day and through whom, in the meantime, he often succeeded in pleasing her. 
Also, his long habit of society, of luxury, had given him, at the same time as a disdain for them, a need for them, so that by the time he had come to regard the most modest houses as exactly on the same plane as the most princely, his senses were so accustomed to the latter that he experienced some indisposition at finding himself in the former. 
He had the same esteem – identical to a degree they could not have believed – for a petit bourgeois family which asked him up to a dance on the fifth floor, Stairway D, left at the landing, as for the Princess of Parma, who gave the finest parties in Paris; but he did not have the feeling of being actually at a ball while standing with the fathers in the bedroom of the mistress of the house and the sight of the wash-stands covered with towels, of the beds, transformed into cloakrooms, their coverlets piled with overcoats and hats, gave him the same stifling sensation that people today who are used to twenty years of electricity may experience at the smell of a lamp blackening or a nightlight smoking. 
On the days when he dined in town, he would have the horses harnessed for seven-thirty; he would dress while thinking about Odette and so would not be alone, because the constant thought of Odette would give to the moments in which he was away from her the same particular charm as to those in which she was there. 
He would get into his carriage, but he would feel that this thought had leaped into it at the same time and settled on his knees like a beloved pet which one takes everywhere and which he would keep with him at the table, unbeknownst to the other guests. 
He would stroke it, warm himself at it, and, experiencing a sort of languor, yield to a light quivering that tensed his neck and his nose, and was new to him, all the while fastening the bunch of columbines in his buttonhole. 
Having felt unwell and sad for some time, especially from the time that Odette had introduced Forcheville to the Verdurins, Swann would have liked to go and rest a little in the country. 
But he would not have had the courage to leave Paris for a single day while Odette was there. 
The air was warm; these were the finest days of spring. 
And though he might cross a city of stone to immure himself in some town house, what was constantly before his eyes was a park that he owned near Combray, where, from four o’clock on, before reaching the asparagus patch, because of the wind that comes from the fields of Méséglise, one could savour as much coolness under an arbour as at the edge of the pond encircled by forget-me-nots and gladioli, and where, when he dined, red currants and roses intertwined by his gardener ran around the table.
After dinner, if the appointed meeting time at the Bois or Saint-Cloud was early, he would leave so soon after getting up from the table – especially if rain was threatening to fall and make the ‘faithful’ go home earlier – that once the Princesse des Laumes (at whose home they had dined late and whom Swann had left before coffee was served in order to join the Verdurins on the island in the Bois) had said:
– Really, if Swann were thirty years older and had bladder trouble, one would excuse him for running off like that. 
But the fact is he doesn’t care what people think.
He told himself that the charm of springtime which he could not go down to enjoy at Combray he could at least find on the Île des Cygnes64 or at Saint-Cloud. 
But since he could think only about Odette, he did not even know if he had detected the smell of the leaves, if there had been any light from the moon. 
He was greeted by the little phrase from the sonata played in the garden on the restaurant piano. 
If there was no piano there, the Verdurins would take great pains to have one brought down from a bedroom or dining-room: it was not that Swann had come back into favour with them, on the contrary. 
But the idea of organizing an ingenious pleasure for someone, even for someone they did not like, fostered in them, during the time required for these preparations, exceptional and ephemeral feelings of warmth and cordiality. 
Now and then he would say to himself that another spring evening was passing, he would force himself to pay attention to the trees, the sky. 
But the agitation with which Odette’s presence filled him, and also a slight feverish indisposition that had hardly left him for some time now, denied him that calm and well-being which are the indispensable background to the impressions we derive from nature.
One evening when Swann had agreed to dine with the Verdurins, and had just mentioned during dinner that the next day he was going to attend a banquet for old comrades, Odette had answered him across the table, in front of Forcheville, who was now one of the faithful, in front of the painter, in front of Cottard:
– Yes, I know you have your banquet, so I won’t see you till I get home, but don’t be too late.
Even though Swann had never become very seriously offended by Odette’s friendliness towards one or another of the faithful, he felt an exquisite pleasure on hearing her confess in front of everyone this way, with such calm lack of modesty, to their regular meetings every night, his privileged position in her house and the preference for him which it implied. 
Of course Swann had often reflected that Odette was in no way a remarkable woman, and the ascendancy he exerted over a creature so inferior to him was not something that ought to appear to him very flattering to see proclaimed to all the ‘faithful’, but from the time he had first noticed that many men found Odette an enchanting and desirable woman, the attraction which her body had for them had awoken in him a painful need to master her entirely even in the smallest parts of her heart. 
And he had begun to set an inestimable price on those times spent in her house at night, when he would sit her on his knees, make her say what she thought of one thing, of another, when he would count up the only goods whose possession he now valued on earth. 
And so, after this dinner, taking her aside, he did not fail to thank her effusively, endeavouring to teach her according to the degrees of gratitude he displayed to her, the scale of pleasures that she could give him, the highest of which was to guarantee him, during the time that his love should last and make him vulnerable to them, protection from the assaults of jealousy.
When he came away from the banquet the next day, it was pouring with rain, all he had was his victoria; a friend offered to drive him home in his coupé, and because Odette, by the fact that she had asked him to come, had given him the assurance that she was not waiting for anyone else, it was with a tranquil mind and a happy heart that, rather than set off in the rain like this, he would have gone back home to bed. 
But perhaps, if she saw that he did not seem anxious to spend the last part of every evening without exception in her company, she might neglect to reserve it for him, precisely the one time when he particularly desired it.
He reached her house after eleven o’clock, and, as he was apologizing for not being able to come earlier, she complained that it was indeed very late, the storm had made her unwell, she had a headache and warned him that she would not keep him more than half an hour, that at midnight she would send him away; and, soon afterwards, she felt tired and wanted to go to sleep.
– So, no cattleyas tonight? 
he said to her, after I was so hoping for a nice little cattleya.
– No, no, darling, no cattleyas tonight, you can see I’m unwell!
She asked him to turn out the light before he went, he himself closed the curtains of the bed and left. 
But when he was back at home, the idea came to him abruptly that perhaps Odette had been waiting for someone else that night, had only pretended to be tired and had asked him to turn out the lights only so that he would believe she was going to go to sleep, that as soon as he left, she had turned the lights on again, and let in the man who was going to spend the night with her. 
He looked at the time. 
It was about an hour and a half since he had left her, he went back out, took a hackney carriage and stopped it very close to where she lived, in a little street perpendicular to the one on to which the back of her house opened and into which he sometimes went to knock at the window of her bedroom so that she would come and open the door for him; he got out of the carriage, the neighbourhood was dark and deserted, he had only to walk a few steps and he came out almost opposite her house. 
Amid the blackness of all the windows in the street in which the lights had long since been put out, he saw just one from which there spilled out – between shutters which pressed its mysterious golden pulp – the light which filled the bedroom and which, on so many other evenings, as soon as he saw it when he came into the street, lifted his spirits and announced to him: ‘She’s there waiting for you’ and which now tortured him by saying: ‘She’s there with the man she was waiting for.’ He wanted to know who it was; he slipped along the wall as far as the window, but between the oblique slats of the shutters he could see nothing; all he heard in the silence of the night was the murmur of a conversation. 
Certainly it hurt him to see that light and know that in its golden atmosphere, behind the sash, the unseen and detested pair were moving about, to hear the murmur revealing the presence of the man who had come after he left, Odette’s duplicity, the happiness she was enjoying with him.
And yet he was glad he had come: the torment that had forced him to leave his house had become less acute as it became less vague, now that Odette’s other life, of which he had had, back then, a sudden helpless suspicion, was now in his grasp, fully illuminated by the lamp, an unwitting prisoner in that room into which, when he chose, he could go to surprise it and capture it; or rather he would knock on the shutters as he often did when he came very late; this way at least, Odette would learn that he knew, that he had seen the light and heard the talking, and that, after having just a moment ago pictured her laughing with the other man at his illusions, he would now be the one to see them, confident in their error, actually outwitted by him whom they believed to be so very far away and who, in fact, already knew he was going to knock at the shutters. 
And perhaps, what he was feeling at this moment, which was almost pleasant, was also something different from the assuaging of a doubt and a distress: it was a pleasure in knowledge. 
If, ever since he had fallen in love, things had regained for him a little of the delightful interest they had once had for him, but only insofar as they were illuminated by the memory of Odette, now it was another of the faculties of his studious youth that his jealousy revived, a passion for truth, but for a truth that was likewise interposed between him and his mistress, taking its light only from her, a completely individual truth whose sole object, of an infinite value and almost disinterested in its beauty, was Odette’s actions, her relationships, her plans, her past. 
At all other periods of his life, the little everyday words and deeds of a person had always seemed worthless to Swann if someone conveyed them to him as the subject of a bit of gossip, he found such gossip meaningless, and, while he listened to it, only the most vulgar part of his attention was interested; these were the times when he felt himself to be most mediocre. 
But in this strange phase of love, an individual person assumes something so profound that the curiosity he now felt awakening in him concerning the smallest occupations of this woman, was the same curiosity he had once had about History. 
And all these things that would have shamed him up to now, such as spying, tonight, outside a window, tomorrow perhaps, for all he knew, cleverly inducing neutral people to speak, bribing servants, listening at doors, now seemed to him to be, fully as much as were the deciphering of texts, the weighing of evidence and the interpretation of old monuments, merely methods of scientific investigation with a real intellectual value and appropriate to a search for the truth.
On the point of knocking on the shutters, he felt a pang of shame thinking that Odette was going to know he had been suspicious, that he had come back, that he had posted himself in the street. 
She had often told him what a horror she had of jealous men, of lovers who spied. 
What he was about to do was very uncouth, and from now on she would detest him, whereas now, for the moment, so long as he had not knocked, perhaps, even while deceiving him, she loved him. 
How often we sacrifice the fulfilment of a possible happiness to our impatience for an immediate pleasure! 
But the desire to know the truth was stronger and seemed to him nobler. 
He knew that the reality of certain circumstances which he would have given his life to reconstruct accurately could be read behind that window striated with light, as under the gold-illuminated cover of one of those precious manuscripts to whose artistic richness itself the scholar who consults them cannot remain indifferent. 
He felt a sensuous pleasure in finding out the truth that so impassioned him from this unique, ephemeral and precious copy of a translucid substance so warm and so beautiful. 
Then, too, the advantage he felt he had – that he so needed to feel he had – over them, was perhaps less in knowing than in being able to show them he knew. 
He raised himself on his tiptoes. 
He knocked. 
They had not heard, he knocked again more loudly, the conversation stopped. 
A man’s voice which he tried to distinguish from among the voices of those of Odette’s friends whom he knew asked:
He was not sure he recognized it. 
He knocked again. 
The window was opened, then the shutters. 
Now, there was no way to retreat and, since she was going to know everything, so as not to seem too wretched, too jealous and curious, he merely called out, carelessly and gaily:
– Please don’t disturb yourself, I was just passing by, I saw the light was on, I wanted to know if you were feeling better.
He looked. 
Before him, two old gentlemen were standing at the window, one holding a lamp, and then he saw the bedroom, a bedroom unknown to him. 
Because he was in the habit, when he came to Odette’s house very late, of recognizing her window by the fact that it was the only one lit among windows that were all alike, he had made a mistake and knocked at the window after hers, which belonged to the adjoining house. 
He went away apologizing and returned home, happy that the satisfaction of his curiosity had left their love intact and that after having simulated a sort of indifference towards Odette for so long, he had not given her, by his jealousy, that proof of loving her too much, which, between two lovers, exempts, for ever after, from loving enough, the one who receives it. 
He did not talk to her about this misadventure, he himself did not think about it further. 
But now and then his thoughts as they moved about would come upon the memory of it which they had not noticed, bump up against it, drive it farther in, and Swann would feel a sudden, deep pain. 
As if it were a physical pain, Swann’s mind could not lessen it; but at least with physical pain, because it is independent of thought, thought can dwell on it, note that it has diminished, that it has momentarily ceased. 
But with this pain the mind, merely by recalling it, recreated it. 
To wish not to think about it was still to think about it, still to suffer from it. 
And when, chatting with friends, he forgot his hurt, all of a sudden a word someone said to him would make him change expression, like a wounded man whom some clumsy person has just carelessly touched on his sore arm or leg. 
When he left Odette, he was happy, he felt calm, he recalled her smiles, derisive when speaking of this or that other person, and affectionate towards him, the heaviness of her head which she had shifted from its axis to incline it, let it fall, almost despite herself, on his lips, as she had done the first time in the carriage, the languishing looks she had cast at him while she was in his arms, as with a shiver she pulled her inclined head in against her shoulder.
But instantly his jealousy, as if it were the shadow of his love, would furnish itself with a duplicate of the new smile she had given him that very evening – and which, inverse now, mocked Swann and was filled with love for another man – with that inclination of her head but reversed towards other lips, with all the marks of affection, now given to another man, that she had given him. 
And all the sensuous memories he carried away from her house were like so many sketches, ‘plans’ like those a decorator submits to you, that allowed Swann to form an idea of the ardent or swooning attitudes she might adopt with other men. 
So that he came to regret every pleasure he enjoyed with her, every invented caress whose sweetness he had been so imprudent as to point out to her, every grace he discovered in her, for he knew that a moment later, they would supply new instruments for torturing him.
This torture became still crueller when Swann remembered a brief expression he had surprised, a few days before, and for the first time, in Odette’s eyes. 
It was after dinner, at the Verdurins’. 
Either because Forcheville, feeling that Saniette, his brother-in-law, was not in favour in their house, wanted to use him as a whipping-boy and shine in front of them at his expense, or because he had been irritated by a clumsy remark which Saniette had just made to him and which, in fact, had gone unnoticed by those present, who were not aware of the unpleasant allusion it might contain, quite against the wishes of the one who had uttered it without any malice, or finally because for some time now he had been looking for an opportunity to induce them to banish from the house someone who was too well acquainted with him and whom he knew to be so refined that he felt embarrassed at certain moments simply by his presence, Forcheville answered this clumsy remark of Saniette’s with such coarseness, hurling insults at him, and emboldened, as he shouted, by Saniette’s pain, his dismay, his entreaties, that the wretched man, after asking Mme Verdurin if he ought to stay, and receiving no answer, had left the house stammering, tears in his eyes. 
Odette had watched this scene impassively, but when the door closed on Saniette, lowering as it were by several notches her face’s habitual expression, so as to be able to find herself, in her baseness, on an equal footing with Forcheville, she had made her eyes glitter with a sly smile of congratulations for the audacity he had shown, of mockery for the man who had been its victim; she had cast him a glance of complicity in evil which was so clearly intended to say: ‘That finished him off, or I’m very much mistaken. Did you see how pathetic he looked? He was actually crying,’ that Forcheville, when his eyes met that glance, suddenly sobering from the anger or simulation of anger which still warmed him, smiled and answered:
– He need only have been friendly, and he would still be here. 
A good rebuke does a man no harm at any age.
One day when Swann had gone out in the middle of the afternoon to pay a call, not having found the person he wanted to see, he had the idea of going to Odette’s house at an hour when he never went there, but when he knew she was always at home having her nap or writing letters before tea-time, and when he would enjoy seeing her for a little while without bothering her. 
The concierge told him he thought she was there; he rang, thought he heard a noise, heard footsteps, but no one opened the door. 
Anxious, irritated, he went into the little street on which the other side of the house looked out, stood in front of the window of Odette’s bedroom; the curtains prevented him from seeing anything, he knocked hard on the window-panes, called out; no one opened the window. 
He saw that some neighbours were watching him. 
He went away, thinking that after all, perhaps he had been mistaken in believing he heard footsteps; but he remained so preoccupied by it that he could not think about anything else. 
An hour later, he came back. 
He found her there; she told him she had been at home earlier when he rang, but was sleeping; the bell had woken her, she had guessed it was Swann, she had run after him, but he had already left. 
She had certainly heard the sound of knocking at the window-panes. 
Swann immediately recognized this statement as one of those fragments of true fact which liars, when caught unprepared, console themselves by introducing into the composition of the falsehood they are inventing, believing they can accommodate it there and steal away its resemblance to the Truth. 
Of course when Odette had just done something she did not want to reveal, she would hide it deep inside herself. 
But as soon as she found herself face to face with the man to whom she wanted to lie, she was overcome with uneasiness, all her ideas collapsed, her faculties of invention and reasoning were paralysed, she found nothing in her head but emptiness, yet it was necessary to say something, and all she would find within reach was the very thing she had wanted to conceal and which, being true, was all that had remained there. 
She would detach a little piece from it, unimportant in itself, telling herself that after all this was better since the detail was authentic and did not present the same dangers as a false detail. 
‘At least this is true, she would say to herself, so much is gained, anyway. He may make inquiries and he’ll see that it’s true, so at least it won’t be this that gives me away.’ She was wrong, it was precisely this that gave her away, she did not realize that the true detail had corners that could fit only into the contiguous details of the true fact from which she had arbitrarily detached it, corners which, whatever might be the invented details among which she placed it, would always reveal, by their excess of material and unfilled empty areas, that it was not from among these that it had come. 
‘She admits that she heard me ring, then knock, and that she thought it was me, that she wanted to see me, Swann said to himself. But this does not conform with the fact that no one opened the door.’
But he did not point out this contradiction to her, because he thought that, left to herself, Odette would perhaps produce some lie that would be a faint indication of the truth; she would talk; he would not interrupt her, he would collect with an avid and painful piety the words she said to him, feeling (precisely because she was hiding it behind them as she talked to him) that, like the sacred veil, they retained the vague imprint, sketched the uncertain features, of that reality so infinitely precious and, alas! undiscoverable – what she had been doing that afternoon at three o’clock, when he came – of which he would never possess more than these lies, illegible and divine vestiges, and which now existed only in the memory of this woman, who would conceal it like stolen goods and contemplate it without being able to appreciate it, but would not hand it over to him. 
Of course, he fully suspected at times that in themselves Odette’s daily actions were not passionately interesting, and that the relationships she might have with other men did not exhale naturally, universally and for every intelligent creature a morbid sadness capable of infecting one with a feverish desire to commit suicide. 
He would then realize that this interest, this sadness existed only in him like a disease, and that, once this disease was cured, Odette’s actions, the kisses she might have given would become once again as harmless as those of so many other women. 
But the fact that the painful curiosity which Swann brought to them now had its origin only in himself was not enough to make him think it was unreasonable to consider this curiosity important and to use every possible means to satisfy it. 
For Swann was reaching an age at which one’s philosophy – encouraged by the current philosophy of the day, and also by that of the circle in which Swann had spent so much of his life, that of the social set attached to the Princesse des Laumes, where it was agreed that intelligence was in direct ratio to scepticism and nothing was real and incontestable except the individual tastes of each person – is no longer that of youth, but a positive, almost medical philosophy, the philosophy of men who, instead of exteriorizing the objects of their aspirations, try to derive from the years that have already elapsed a stable residue of habits and passions which they can regard as characteristic and permanent and which they will deliberately make it their primary concern that the kind of life they adopt may satisfy. 
Swann thought it prudent to make allowances in his life for the pain he felt at not knowing what Odette had been doing, just as he made allowances for the fresh outbreak which a damp climate might cause in his eczema; to provide in his budget for a sizeable sum of available funds for obtaining information about how Odette spent her days, without which he would feel unhappy, just as he reserved the same for other partialities from which he knew he could expect to derive pleasure, at least before he had fallen in love, like his partiality for collections and for good food.
When he wanted to say good-bye to Odette in order to leave for home, she asked him to stay longer and even held him back suddenly, by taking his arm, when he was about to open the door to go out. 
But he took no notice of this, because among the multitude of gestures, remarks, minor incidents that fill a conversation, it is inevitable that we should come close, without detecting anything in them to attract our attention, to those that hide a truth our suspicions are blindly seeking, and that we should stop, on the other hand, at those behind which there is nothing. 
She kept saying to him: ‘How unfortunate – you never come in the afternoon, and the one time you do come, I don’t see you.’ He knew very well that she was not sufficiently in love with him to be so keenly distressed at having missed his visit, but, because she was good, desirous of pleasing him and often sad when she had vexed him, he found it quite natural that she should be sad this time at having deprived him of the pleasure of spending an hour together, a very great pleasure, not for her, but for him. 
Yet it was a thing unimportant enough so that the pained air she continued to have ended by surprising him. 
She reminded him even more than usual, when she looked this way, of the faces of the women portrayed by the painter of the Primavera.65 
She had, at these times, their sort of dejected and woebegone expression which seems about to succumb beneath the weight of a grief too heavy for them, when they are merely letting the child Jesus play with a pomegranate or watching Moses pour water into a trough.66 
He had once before seen such a sadness in her, but he no longer knew when. 
And suddenly he remembered: it was when Odette had lied in talking to Mme Verdurin the day after that dinner to which she had not come on the pretext that she was ill and in reality in order to stay with Swann. 
Of course, even if she had been the most scrupulous of women, she might not have felt remorse over a lie as innocent. 
But the lies Odette generally told were less innocent and served to prevent discoveries that might have created for her, with one person or another, terrible difficulties. 
And so when she lied, overcome by fear, aware that she was not very well armed to defend herself, uncertain of success, she wanted to cry, from exhaustion, like certain children who have not slept. 
And she also knew that her lie was usually doing serious harm to the man to whom she was telling it, and into whose power she was perhaps going to fall if she lied badly. 
And so she felt at once humble and guilty in his presence. 
And when she had to tell an insignificant social lie, the association of sensations and memories would leave her with the faintness that follows overexertion and the regret that follows an act of malevolence.
What depressing lie was she telling Swann that gave her this pained look, this plaintive voice which seemed to falter under the effort she demanded of herself and ask for forgiveness? 
He had an idea that it was not merely the truth about the incident in the afternoon that she was endeavouring to hide from him, but something more immediate, that had perhaps not yet transpired and was quite imminent, something that might enlighten him about this truth. 
At that moment, he heard the bell ring. 
Odette did not stop talking, but her words were now no more than a long lament: her regret at not having seen Swann in the afternoon, at not having opened the door to him, had turned into true despair.
He could hear the front door closing again and the sound of a carriage, as if someone was going away again – probably the one Swann was not supposed to meet – after being told that Odette was out. 
Then, when he reflected that merely by coming at an hour when he was not in the habit of coming he had managed to disturb so many arrangements she did not want him to discover, he was overcome with a feeling of discouragement, almost of despondency. 
But because he loved Odette, because he was in the habit of turning all his thoughts towards her, the pity he might have inspired in himself he felt for her instead, and he murmured: ‘Poor darling!’ As he was leaving her, she picked up several letters that she had on her table and asked him if he would put them in the post. 
He took them away with him and, once he was home, saw that he had kept the letters on him. 
He returned as far as the post-office, drew them from his pocket and before tossing them into the box looked at the addresses. 
They were all for tradesmen, except one for Forcheville. 
He held it in his hand. 
He said to himself: ‘If I saw what was inside it, I would know what she calls him, how she talks to him, if there’s anything between them. It may even be that by not looking, I’m behaving with a lack of delicacy towards Odette, because this is the only way to free myself of a suspicion which is perhaps calumnious for her, which is in any case bound to hurt her, and which nothing would be able to destroy, once the letter was gone.’
He returned home after leaving the post-office, but he had kept that last letter with him. 
He lit a candle and held up close to it the envelope he had not dared to open. 
At first he could not read anything, but the envelope was thin and, by making it adhere to the stiff card that was enclosed in it, he could read, through its transparency, the last words. 
It was a very cold, formal ending. 
If it had not been he looking at a letter addressed to Forcheville, but instead Forcheville reading a letter addressed to Swann, Forcheville would have seen words that were far more affectionate! 
He took firm hold of the card that danced in the envelope, which was larger than it was, then, sliding it with his thumb, brought its different lines one after another under the part of the envelope where the paper was not doubled, the only part through which one could read.
Despite this he could not distinguish anything very well. 
But it did not matter, because he had seen enough to realize that its subject was a minor, unimportant event that had nothing to do with a love affair; it was something relating to an uncle of Odette’s. 
Swann had read clearly at the beginning of the line: ‘I was right’, but had not understood what Odette had done that was right, when suddenly, a word he had not at first been able to decipher appeared and illuminated the meaning of the entire sentence: ‘I was right to open the door, it was my uncle.’ Open the door! 
So Forcheville had been there that afternoon when Swann rang the bell, and she had made him leave, which was the source of the noise Swann had heard.
Then he read the whole letter; at the end she apologized for having acted so unceremoniously towards him and said he had forgotten his cigarettes at her house, the same sentence she had written to Swann one of the first times he had come. 
But in Swann’s case she had added: ‘If you had left your heart here, I would not have let you take it away again.’ For Forcheville nothing like that: no allusion that might suggest that they were having an affair. 
And in fact, Forcheville was more deceived in all this than he, since Odette was writing to him to assure him that the visitor had been her uncle. 
In the end he, Swann, was the one she considered important, the one for whom she had dismissed the other. 
And yet, if there was nothing between Odette and Forcheville, why had she not opened the door right away, why had she said, ‘I did the right thing to open the door, it was my uncle’? 
if she was doing nothing wrong at that moment, how would Forcheville even be able to explain to himself the fact that she had not opened the door? 
Swann remained there, disconsolate, embarrassed and yet happy, with this envelope which Odette had handed over to him quite fearlessly, so absolute was her confidence in his sense of delicacy, but through the transparent glazing of which was revealed to him, with the secret of an incident which he would never have believed it possible to find out, a little of Odette’s life, as in a narrow illuminated section cut directly out of the unknown. 
Then his jealousy rejoiced over it, as if that jealousy had had an independent, selfish vitality, voracious for anything that would feed it, even at Swann’s own expense. 
Now it had food and Swann was going to be able to begin worrying each day over the visitors Odette might have received at about five o’clock, and begin trying to learn where Forcheville had been at that hour. 
For Swann’s affection continued to preserve the same character imprinted on it from the very beginning by his ignorance as to how Odette spent her days and by the mental laziness that stopped him from compensating for his ignorance with his imagination. 
He had not been jealous at first of Odette’s whole life, but only of the times when some circumstance, perhaps wrongly interpreted, led him to suppose that Odette might have deceived him. 
His jealousy, like an octopus that casts a first, then a second, then a third mooring, attached itself solidly first to that time, five o’clock in the afternoon, then to another, then to yet another. 
But Swann was not capable of inventing his sufferings. 
They were merely the memory, the perpetuation of a suffering that had come to him from outside.
But outside, everything brought him more suffering. 
He wanted to separate Odette from Forcheville, take her to spend a few days in the south. 
But he believed all the men who happened to be in the hotel desired her and that she desired them. 
And so he who in former days, when travelling, had sought out new people, large groups, now appeared unsociable, appeared to be fleeing the company of men as if it had cruelly wounded him. 
And how could he not be misanthropic, when he saw every man as a possible lover of Odette’s? 
And so his jealousy, even more than the sensuous and light-hearted feeling he had at first had for Odette, altered Swann’s character and changed entirely, in the eyes of other people, the very appearance of the external signs by which that character was manifested.
A month after the day on which he had read the letter addressed by Odette to Forcheville, Swann went to a dinner which the Verdurins were giving in the Bois. 
At the moment when they were preparing to leave, he noticed some confabulations between Mme Verdurin and several of the guests and thought he heard them reminding the pianist to come to a party at Chatou67 the next day; yet, he, Swann, had not been invited.
The Verdurins had spoken in low voices and in vague terms, but the painter, probably inattentive, exclaimed:
– There must be no lights, and have him play the ‘Moonlight’ Sonata in the dark so we can watch how the light comes up.
Mme Verdurin, seeing that Swann was two steps away, now wore that expression in which the desire to make the person who is talking be quiet and the desire to maintain a look of innocence in the eyes of the person who is hearing, neutralize each other in an intense nullity of gaze, in which the motionless sign of intelligence and complicity is concealed beneath an innocent smile and which in the end, being common to all those who find themselves making a social blunder, reveals it instantly, if not to those making it, at least to the one who is its victim. 
Odette suddenly had the desperate look of one who has given up fighting the crushing difficulties of life, and Swann anxiously counted the minutes that separated him from the time when, after leaving the restaurant, during the drive home with her, he would be able to ask her for an explanation, persuade her not to go to Chatou the next day or to see that he was invited, and to soothe in her arms the anguish he was feeling. 
At last the carriages were sent for. 
Mme Verdurin said to Swann:
– Well now, good-bye, we’ll see you soon, I trust? 
attempting by the amiableness of her gaze and the constraint of her smile to keep him from realizing that she was not saying to him, as she had always done until now: ‘Tomorrow, then, at Chatou, the day after at my house.’
M. and Mme Verdurin made Forcheville get in with them, Swann’s carriage had pulled up behind theirs and he was waiting for theirs to leave so that he could help Odette into his.
– Odette, we’re taking you home, said Mme Verdurin, we have a little spot for you here next to M. de Forcheville.
– What? 
I thought I was driving you home, cried Swann, saying what had to be said without dissembling, because the carriage door was open, the seconds were numbered, and he could not go home without her in his present state.
– Now, you can certainly go home alone, we’ve let you have her to yourself often enough, said Mme Verdurin.
– Did you see the way Swann permits himself to act with us now? 
said Mme Verdurin to her husband when they were back at home. 
I thought he was going to eat me alive, because we were taking Odette with us. 
It’s quite unseemly, really! 
Let him just say right out that we’re running a house of assignation! 
I don’t understand how Odette can tolerate such behavior. 
He absolutely seems to be saying: you belong to me. 
I’m going to tell Odette what I think, I hope she’ll understand.
– No, really, the filthy creature! using, without realizing it, and perhaps responding to the same obscure need to justify herself – like Françoise at Combray when the chicken did not want to die – the same words which the last twitches of an inoffensive animal in its death-throes wring from the countryman who is killing it.
And when Mme Verdurin’s carriage had left and Swann’s came forward, his coachman looked at him and asked if he was not ill or if there had been an accident.
Swann sent him away, he wanted to walk, and he returned home on foot through the Bois. 
He talked to himself out loud, in the same slightly artificial tone he had always used when he enumerated the charms of the little clan and extolled the magnanimity of the Verdurins. 
But just as the conversation, the smiles, the kisses of Odette became as odious to him as he had once found them sweet, if they were addressed to another man, in the same way, the Verdurins’ salon, which only recently had still seemed to him amusing, inspired with a real enthusiasm for art and even a sort of moral nobility, now that a man other than himself was the one Odette was going there to meet, to love without restraint, exhibited to him its absurdities, its foolishness, its ignominy.
He pictured to himself with disgust the next day’s soirée at Chatou. 
‘The idea of going to Chatou anyway! Like drapers after shutting up shop! These people really are sublimely bourgeois, they can’t really exist, they must have come out of a Labiche comedy!’68
The Cottards would be there, maybe Brichot. 
‘It’s quite grotesque, the lives of these nonentities, always in each other’s pockets like this. They would feel utterly lost, I swear, if they didn’t all meet up again tomorrow at Chatou!’ Alas! the painter would be there too, the painter who enjoyed ‘matchmaking’, who would invite Forcheville to come to his studio with Odette. 
He could see Odette in clothes far too formal for this country outing, ‘because she’s so vulgar and worst of all, poor little thing, such a fool!!!’
He could hear the jokes that Mme Verdurin would make after dinner, jokes which, whoever the bore might be at whom they were aimed, had always amused him because he saw Odette laughing, laughing with him, almost inside him. 
Now he felt that perhaps they would be making Odette laugh at him. 
‘What fetid humour! he said, twisting his mouth into an expression of disgust so powerful that he felt the muscular sensation of his grimace even in his neck, flung back against the collar of his shirt. And how can a creature whose face is made in the image of God find anything to laugh about in those nauseating jokes? Any nose of any delicacy at all would turn away with horror so as not to allow itself to be offended by such musty odours. It’s really incredible to think that a human being could fail to understand that, by permitting herself to smile at the expense of a fellow human being who has loyally reached out his hand to her, she is sinking down into a mire from which it will be impossible, with the best will in the world, ever to rescue her. I live too many leagues above the swamp in which these vermin are gabbling and wallowing to be splattered by the jokes of a Verdurin, he cried, lifting his head, proudly throwing back his shoulders. As God is my witness, I have honestly tried to pull Odette up out of there, and lift her into a nobler and purer atmosphere. But every human being has only so much patience, and mine is exhausted,’ he said to himself, as if this mission to tear Odette away from an atmosphere of sarcasm dated from farther back than the last few minutes and as if he had not taken it upon himself only when he thought perhaps these sarcasms were aimed at him and were attempting to separate Odette from him.
He could see the pianist preparing to play the ‘Moonlight’ Sonata and the faces Mme Verdurin would make as she grew dismayed at the harm that Beethoven’s music was going to do to her nerves: ‘Idiot, liar! he exclaimed. And the woman pretends to love Art!’ She would tell Odette, after having adroitly insinuated a few words of praise for Forcheville, as she had so often done for him: ‘Make a little room next to you for M. de Forcheville.’ ‘In the dark! The pimp, the procuress!’ ‘Procuress’ was also the name he applied to the music that would invite them to be quiet, to dream together, to look at each other, to take each other by the hand. 
He found there was some good to be said for the severity towards the arts displayed by Plato, by Bossuet,69 and by the old school of French education.
In fact, the life one led at the Verdurins’ and which he had so often called ‘real life’ seemed to him the worst of all, and their little clan the lowest of social circles. 
‘It really is, he said, the lowest thing on the social ladder, Dante’s last circle.70 
No doubt about it, the venerable text refers to the Verdurins! 
Really, the fashionable folk, whom one may vilify, but who all the same are different from these gangs of yobs, show a most profound sagacity in refusing to know them, or even to dirty the tips of their fingers with them! 
What sound intuition there is in that Noli me tangere71 of the Faubourg Saint-Germain!
’ He had long since left the avenues of the Bois, he had nearly reached his house, and still, not yet sobered from his pain and from the insincere exuberance with which the deceitful intonations, the artificial sonority of his own voice, pouring into him more abundantly every minute, had intoxicated him, he continued to perorate out loud in the silence of the night: ‘Society people have their faults, as no one knows better than I do, but all the same really these are people for whom certain things are out of the question. I can think of one fashionable woman who was far from perfect, but all the same really she had a basic decency, a sense of honour in her dealings that would have made her incapable, whatever might happen, of any sort of treachery and which is quite sufficient to put a vast gulf between her and a vixen like Verdurin. Verdurin! What a name! Oh, one may truly say they are the ultimate, they are perfect specimens of their kind! Thank God – it was high time I stopped condescending to mix in utter promiscuousness with such infamy, such excrement.’
But, just as the virtues which he had attributed that same afternoon to the Verdurins would not have been enough, had they even really possessed them but had not encouraged and protected his love, to provoke in Swann that intoxication in which he was moved by their magnanimity and which, even if it was propagated through other people, could only come to him from Odette – in the same way, the immorality that he now saw in the Verdurins, had it been real, would have been powerless, if they had not invited Odette with Forcheville and without him, to unleash his indignation and cause him to vilify ‘their infamy’. 
And no doubt Swann’s voice was more perceptive than he was himself, when it refused to pronounce these words filled with disgust for the Verdurin social circle and joy at being done with it, otherwise than in an artificial tone and as if they were chosen rather to appease his anger than to express his thoughts. 
The latter, in fact, while he was indulging in these invectives, were probably, without his noticing it, occupied with a completely different object, for once he reached home, scarcely had he closed the carriage gate behind him, than suddenly he struck himself on the forehead, and, opening it again, went out again exclaiming in a natural voice this time: ‘I think I’ve found a way of getting invited to the dinner at Chatou tomorrow!’ But the way must have been bad, for Swann was not invited: Doctor Cottard, who, summoned to the country on a serious case, had not seen the Verdurins for several days and had not been able to go to Chatou, said, the day after that dinner, as he sat down to the table at their house:
– Why, won’t we be seeing M. Swann this evening? 
He is certainly what you call a personal friend of…
– Why, I should hope not! cried Mme Verdurin. 
May the Lord preserve us from him, he is deadly dull, stupid and ill-mannered.
At these words Cottard showed surprise and submission at the same time, as though confronted with a truth contrary to everything he had believed up to then, but irresistibly obvious; and, lowering his nose nervously and timidly into his plate, he confined himself to answering: ‘Ah! -ah! -ah! -ah! -ah!’, traversing along a descending scale, in his forced but orderly retreat into the depths of himself, the entire register of his voice. 
And Swann was never mentioned again at the Verdurins’.
So the salon which had brought Swann and Odette together became an obstacle to their meetings. 
She no longer said to him as she had in the early days of their love: ‘We’ll see each other tomorrow night anyway, there’s a supper at the Verdurins’,’ but: ‘We won’t be able to see each other tomorrow night, there’s a supper at the Verdurins’.
’ Or else the Verdurins were to take her to the Opéra-Comique to see Une Nuit de Cléopatre72 and Swann would read in Odette’s eyes that fear of his asking her not to go, which once upon a time he would not have been able to keep himself from kissing as it passed over his mistress’s face, and which now exasperated him. 
‘It’s not anger, however, he said to himself, that I feel when I see that she wants to go and scratch about in that excremental music. It’s sorrow, not for myself certainly, but for her; sorrow at seeing that after more than six months of living in daily contact with me, she has not managed to change enough to eliminate Victor Massé spontaneously! Especially for not having come to understand that there are evenings when a person of any subtlety at all must know how to give up a pleasure, when one asks it of her. She ought to know how to say “I won’t go,” if only by using her intelligence, since it is on the basis of her answer that one will rate once and for all the quality of her soul.’ And having persuaded himself that it really was only in order to be able to pass a more favourable judgment on Odette’s spiritual value that he wanted her to stay with him that evening instead of going to the Opéra-Comique, he presented her with the same reasoning, with the same degree of insincerity as he had presented it to himself, and even with one degree more, for now he was also responding to a desire to capture her through her self-love.
For some time, Odette had shown signs of agitation and uncertainty. 
Although she failed to grasp the meaning of this speech, she did understand that it might belong to the category of ‘scoldings’ and scenes of reproach or supplication, and her familiarity with men enabled her, without paying attention to the details of what they said, to conclude that they would not make such scenes if they were not in love, that since they were in love it was pointless to obey them, that they would be only more in love afterwards. 
And so she would have listened to Swann with the utmost calm if she had not seen that time was passing and that if he talked much longer, she would, as she told him with a smile that was tender, obstinate and abashed, ‘end by missing the Overture!’
On other occasions he told her that the one thing that was more likely than anything else to make him stop loving her was that she would not give up lying. 
‘Even simply from the point of view of your desire to be attractive, he told her, don’t you understand how much of your charm you lose when you stoop to lying? With one confession, think how many faults you could redeem! Really you are much less intelligent than I thought!’ But it was in vain that Swann expounded for her thus all the reasons she had for not lying; they might have undermined some general and systematic approach to lying; but Odette had none; she merely contented herself, whenever she wanted Swann not to know about something she had done, with not telling him about it. 
And so lying was for her an expedient of a particular order; and the only thing that could decide whether she ought to make use of it or confess the truth was a reason of a particular order too, the greater or lesser likelihood that Swann might discover she had not told the truth.
Physically, she was going through a bad phase: she was growing stout; and the expressive and doleful charm, the surprised and dreamy glances she had once had seemed to have disappeared with her first youth. 
So that she had become so dear to Swann at the moment, as it were, when he found her in fact much less pretty. 
He would look at her for a long time trying to recover the charm he had once seen in her, and he would not find it. 
But knowing that under the new chrysalis, what lived on was still Odette, still the same will, evanescent, elusive and guileful, was enough to make Swann continue to put the same passion into trying to capture her. 
Then he would look at a photograph from two years before, he would remember how exquisite she had been. 
And that would console him a little for taking such pains over her.
When the Verdurins carried her off to Saint-Germain, Chatou, Meulan, often, if it was the warm season, they would propose, on the spot, staying there to sleep and not coming back until the next day. 
Mme Verdurin would try to quiet the scruples of the pianist, whose aunt had remained in Paris.
– She’ll be delighted to be rid of you for a day. 
And how could she worry, she knows you’re with us; anyway, she can put the blame on me.
But if she was not successful, M. Verdurin would spring into action, find a telegraph office or a messenger and inquire as to which of the faithful had someone they needed to inform. 
But Odette would thank him and say that she did not need to send anyone a telegram, because she had told Swann once and for all that by sending him one in front of everybody, she would be compromising herself. 
Sometimes she would be gone for several days, the Verdurins would take her to see the tombs at Dreux, or, on the advice of the painter, to Compiègne to admire sunsets as viewed from inside a forest, and then they would push on as far as the Château de Pierrefonds.73
– To think she could visit real historic buildings with me. 
I’ve studied architecture for ten years and I’m forever being implored to take people of very high standing to Beauvais or Saint-Loup-de-Naud74 and would only do it for her, and instead she goes with the lowest of simpletons to wax ecstatic first over the dejecta of Louis-Philippe and Viollet-le-Duc! 
It seems to me you don’t need to be an artist for that and even without a particularly delicate nose, you don’t choose to go holiday-making in latrines in order to be closer to the smell of excrement.
But when she had left for Dreux or Pierrefonds – without, alas, allowing him to go too, as though by chance, on his own account, because ‘that would make a deplorable impression’, she said – he would plunge into the most intoxicating of romances, the railway time-table, which would show him all the ways he might join her, in the afternoon, in the evening, that same morning! 
Not only the ways, but even more, almost: the permission. 
Because after all, the time-table and the trains themselves were not meant for dogs. 
If one informed the public, via printed matter, that at eight o’clock in the morning a train left which arrived in Pierrefonds at ten o’clock, it was because going to Pierrefonds was a lawful act, for which permission from Odette was superfluous; and it was also an act that could have a motive completely different from the desire to meet Odette, since people who did not know her performed it each day, in large enough numbers for it to be worth the trouble of stoking the locomotives.
So she really couldn’t stop him from going to Pierrefonds if he wanted to! 
Now, in fact, he felt that he did want to, and that, if he had not known Odette, he certainly would have gone. 
For a long time now he had wanted to form a clearer idea for himself of Viollet-le-Duc’s restoration work. 
And in this weather, he was moved by an imperious desire for a walk in the forest of Compiègne.
It was truly hard luck that she was forbidding him the only spot that tempted him today. 
Today! 
If he went despite her prohibition, he might see her today! 
But whereas, if at Pierrefonds she had met someone who did not matter, she would have said joyfully: ‘Imagine finding you here!’, and would have asked him to come to see her at the hotel where she was staying with the Verdurins, if she met him, Swann, there, she would be offended, she would say to herself that she was being followed, she would love him less, perhaps she would turn away angrily when she saw him. 
‘So, I no longer have the right to travel!’ she would say to him when they returned, whereas really he was the one who no longer had the right to travel!
For a while he had had the idea, so as to be able to go to Compiègne and Pierrefonds without appearing to be doing it in order to meet Odette, of contriving to be taken there by one of his friends, the Marquis de Forestelle, who had a château in the vicinity. 
The Marquis, to whom he had communicated his plan without letting him know the reason for it, was beside himself with joy and marvelled that Swann, for the first time in fifteen years, was at last consenting to come to see his estate and, since he did not want to stay there, as he had told him, at least promised to take walks and go on excursions with him for a few days. 
Swann pictured himself already down there with M. de Forestelle. 
Even before seeing Odette there, even if he did not manage to see her there, what happiness it would give him to step on that earth where, not knowing the exact location, at any given moment, of her presence, he would feel palpitating everywhere the possibility of her sudden appearance: in the courtyard of the château, now beautiful to him because it was for her sake that he had gone to see it; in every street of the town, which seemed to him romantic; on every road in the forest, rosy in the deep and tender sunset; – numberless and alternative asylums, where, in the uncertain ubiquity of his hopes, his multiplied heart simultaneously came to take refuge, happy and vagabond. 
‘Whatever we do, he would say to M. de Forestelle, let’s take care we don’t stumble on Odette and the Verdurins; I’ve just learned they’re in Pierrefonds today, in fact. There’s time enough for us to see one another in Paris, it wouldn’t be worth the trouble of leaving Paris if they couldn’t take a step without me or I without them.’ And his friend would not understand why, once he was there, he would change a plan twenty times, inspect the dining-rooms of all the hotels in Compiègne without making up his mind to sit down in any of them even though not a trace of the Verdurins had been seen, looking as though he were searching for the very thing he had said he wanted to avoid and then avoiding it as soon as he found it, because if he had encountered the little group, he would pointedly have gone off, glad he had seen Odette and that she had seen him, especially that she had seen him not bothering about her. 
But no, she would certainly guess that it was for her sake that he was there. 
And when M. de Forestelle came to pick him up so that they could leave, he said to him: ‘Alas, no, I can’t go to Pierrefonds today, Odette is there, as it turns out.’ And Swann was happy despite everything to feel that, if alone of all mortals that day he was not allowed to go to Pierrefonds, it was because for Odette he was in fact someone different from the others, her lover, and that this restriction which was applied in his case alone to the universal right to freedom of movement was merely one of the forms of that slavery, of that love which was so dear to him. 
Decidedly it was better not to risk quarrelling with her, to be patient, to wait for her to come back. 
He spent his days bent over a map of the Compiègne forest as if it were the Map of Love,75 and surrounded himself with photographs of the château at Pierrefonds. 
As soon as the day arrived on which it was possible that she would be coming back, he opened the time-table again, calculated which train she must have taken and, if she had been delayed, those that were still available for her. 
He did not go out for fear of missing a telegram, did not go to bed in case, having returned on the last train, she wanted to surprise him by coming to see him in the middle of the night. 
In fact he heard the bell at the carriage gate, it seemed to him they were slow opening it, he wanted to wake up the concierge, went to the window to call out to Odette if it was she, for despite the instructions he had gone downstairs to give the servants himself more than ten times, they were still capable of telling her he was not there. 
It was a servant coming home. 
He noticed the incessant stream of the passing carriages, to which he had never paid attention in the past. 
He listened to each one come from far off, draw near, pass his gate without stopping and go on into the distance bearing a message that was not for him. 
He waited all night, quite uselessly, for the Verdurins had decided to return early, and Odette had been in Paris since noon; it had not occurred to her to tell him; not knowing what to do, she had gone and spent her evening alone at the theatre and long ago, by now, she had returned home to bed and gone to sleep.
The fact was that she had not even thought of him. 
And occasions such as this when she forgot Swann’s very existence were more useful to Odette, did more to attach Swann to her, than all her coquetry. 
Because in this way Swann was kept in that state of painful agitation which had already been powerful enough to make his love blossom on the night when he had not found Odette at the Verdurins’ and had searched for her all evening. 
And he did not have, as I had at Combray in my childhood, happy days during which to forget the sufferings that will return at night. 
Swann spent his days without Odette; and now and then he said to himself that to allow such a pretty woman to go out alone in Paris like that was as imprudent as to put a case full of jewels in the middle of the street. 
Then he would become indignant at all the people passing by as at so many thieves. 
But their faces, formless, collective, escaped the grasp of his imagination and did not feed his jealousy. 
Swann’s mind would become exhausted, until, passing his hand over his eyes, he would exclaim: ‘We must trust in God,’ like those who, after having persisted in embracing the problem of the reality of the external world or the immortality of the soul, grant their tired brains the relief of an act of faith. 
But always the thought of the absent woman was indissolubly mingled with the simplest actions of Swann’s life – having lunch, receiving his mail, leaving the house, going to bed – by the very sadness he felt over performing them without her, like the initials of Philibert le Beau, which, in the church at Brou,76 because of the longing she felt for him, Margaret of Austria intertwined everywhere with her own. 
On certain days, instead of staying at home, he would go and have his lunch in a restaurant not far from his house whose good cooking he had appreciated once upon a time and to which he now went only for one of those reasons, at once mystical and preposterous, that we call romantic; the fact was that this restaurant (which still exists) bore the same name as the street in which Odette lived: Lapérouse.77 
Sometimes, when she had gone away briefly, it was only after several days that she thought of letting him know she had returned to Paris. 
And she would say to him quite simply, no longer taking the precaution as she once had of covering herself, just in case, with a little fragment borrowed from the truth, that she had just returned that moment by the morning train. 
These words were mendacious; at least for Odette they were mendacious, insubstantial, not having, as they would have had if they had been true, a basis in her memory of her arrival at the station; in fact, she was even kept from picturing them to herself at the moment she uttered them, by the contradictory image of what she had been doing that was quite different at the moment she was claiming she had got off the train. 
But in Swann’s mind it was just the opposite, these words, encountering no obstacle, encrusted themselves and assumed the immobility of a truth so indubitable that if a friend told him he had come by that train and had not seen Odette Swann would be convinced it was the friend who was mistaken about the day or the hour, since his account did not agree with what Odette had said. 
Her words would have seemed to him false only if he had suspected beforehand that they were. 
For him to believe she was lying, a previous suspicion was a necessary condition. 
In fact it was also a sufficient condition. 
Then everything Odette said to him would appear suspect. 
If he heard her mention a name, it was certainly the name of one of her lovers; the supposition once forged, he would spend weeks grieving; he even had an interview once with a private investigation agency in order to find out the address and the daily routine of the stranger who would not let him breathe easily except when he went off on a trip, and who, he learned in the end, was an uncle of Odette’s dead for the past twenty years.
Even though in general she did not permit him to meet her in public places, saying that people would talk, sometimes at an evening party to which he and she both had been invited – at Forcheville’s, at the painter’s, or at a charity ball in one of the ministries – he would find himself there at the same time as she. 
He saw her but did not dare stay for fear of irritating her by appearing to spy on the pleasures she was enjoying with other people, pleasures which – as he drove home alone, went to bed as anxious as I myself was to be some years later on the evenings when he would come to dine at the house, at Combray – seemed boundless to him because he had not seen them come to an end. 
And once or twice on such evenings he experienced the sort of happiness which, if it had not been so violently affected by the recoil from the abrupt cessation of anxiety, one would be tempted to call a tranquil happiness, because it consisted of a return to a peaceful state of mind: he had dropped in on a party at the painter’s home and was preparing to go off again; behind him he was leaving Odette transformed into a brilliant stranger, surrounded by men to whom her glances and her gaiety, which were not for him, seemed to speak of some sensuous pleasure that would be enjoyed there or elsewhere (maybe at the ‘Bal des Incohérents’78 where he trembled at the idea that she would go afterwards) and that caused Swann more jealousy than the carnal act itself because he had more difficulty imagining it; he was already on the point of passing through the studio door, when he heard himself being called back with these words (which, by cutting off from the party that end which had terrified him so, made the party seem in retrospect innocent, made Odette’s return a thing no longer inconceivable and terrible, but sweet and familiar and abiding next to him, like a bit of his everyday life, in his carriage, and divested Odette herself of her too brilliant and too gay appearance, showed that it was only a disguise which she had put on for a moment, for its own sake, not with a view to mysterious pleasures, and that she was already tired of it), with these words that Odette tossed at him, as he was already on the threshold: ‘Wouldn’t you wait five minutes for me? I’m leaving, we’ll go back together, you can take me home.’
True, one day Forcheville had asked to be taken back at the same time but, when they had arrived at Odette’s door and he had asked permission to come in too, Odette had answered him, pointing to Swann: ‘Ah! That depends on this gentleman here, ask him. Well, all right, come in for a moment if you want, but not for long because I warn you he likes to talk quietly with me, and he doesn’t much like having visitors when he comes. Ah! If you knew that creature as well as I know him! Isn’t that so, my love,79 I’m the only one who really knows you?’
And Swann was perhaps even more touched to see her addressing him thus, in front of Forcheville, not only these tender words of predilection, but also certain criticisms such as: ‘I’m sure you haven’t answered your friends yet about that dinner on Sunday. Don’t go if you don’t want to, but at least be polite,’ or: ‘Now, have you left your essay on Vermeer here so that you can do a little more of it tomorrow? How lazy you are! I’ll make you work – you’ll see!’, which proved that Odette kept up with his social engagements and his literary work, that the two of them really had a life together. 
And as she said this she gave him a smile in the depths of which he felt she was entirely his.
And so at these moments, while she was making orangeade for them, suddenly, as when a badly regulated reflector first casts around an object, on the wall, large fantastic shadows, which then fold and disappear into it, all the terrible shifting ideas he had formed for himself about Odette would vanish, would rejoin the charming body that stood there in front of him. 
He had the sudden suspicion that this hour spent at Odette’s house, in the lamplight, was perhaps not an artificial hour, invented for his own use (intended to mask that dismaying and delightful thing which he thought about endlessly without being able really to picture it, an hour in Odette’s real life, in Odette’s life when he himself was not there), with stage-set accessories and cardboard fruit, but was perhaps a real hour in Odette’s life, that if he had not been there, she would have set out the same armchair for Forcheville and poured him not some unfamiliar drink, but that very same orangeade, that the world inhabited by Odette was not that other frightful and supernatural world where he spent his time locating her and which perhaps existed only in his imagination, but rather the real world, radiating no special sadness, comprising that table where he was going to be able to write and that drink which he would be permitted to taste, all those objects which he contemplated with as much curiosity and admiration as gratitude, for if by absorbing his dreams they had delivered him from them, they in return had been enriched by them, they showed him the palpable realization of his dreams, and they interested his mind, they assumed substance and shape before his eyes at the same time that they soothed his heart. 
Ah! 
If fate had permitted him to have but a single home with Odette so that in her house he would be in his own, if when he asked the servant what was planned for lunch, it was Odette’s menu that he had learned in answer, if when Odette wanted to go out in the morning to walk down the avenue du Bois de Boulogne, his duty as a good husband had obliged him, even if he did not want to go out, to accompany her, carrying her coat when she was too warm, and at night after dinner if she wanted to stay at home informally dressed, if he had been forced to stay there with her, to do what she wanted; then how completely all those trifles in Swann’s life which seemed to him so sad, would, on the contrary, because they were at the same time part of Odette’s life, have taken on, even the most familiar of them – like that lamp, that orangeade, that armchair which contained so much of his dreams, which materialized so much desire – a sort of superabundant sweetness and mysterious density.
Yet he actually suspected that what he thus longed for was a calm, a peace that would not have been a favourable atmosphere for his love. 
When Odette ceased to be for him a creature always absent, longed for, imaginary, when the feeling he had for her was no longer the same mysterious disturbance caused in him by the phrase from the sonata, but affection, gratitude, when normal relations were established between them that would put an end to his madness and his gloom, then no doubt the actions of Odette’s daily life would appear to him of little interest in themselves – as he had several times already suspected they were, for example on the day when he had read through its envelope the letter addressed to Forcheville. 
Considering his disease with as much discernment as if he had inoculated himself with it in order to study it, he told himself that when he had recovered his health what Odette might be doing would leave him indifferent. 
But, from within his morbid state, in truth he feared death itself no more than such a recovery, which would in fact have been the death of all that he was at present.
After these peaceful evenings, Swann’s suspicions would be calmed; he would bless Odette and the next day, first thing in the morning, he would send around to her house the most beautiful jewels, because those kind attentions the night before had excited either his gratitude, or the desire to see them repeated, or a paroxysm of love that needed to expend itself.
But at other times his grief overcame him again, he imagined that Odette was Forcheville’s mistress and that when the two of them had seen him, from the depths of the Verdurins’ landau, at the Bois, the day before the Chatou party to which he had not been invited, entreat her vainly, with that look of despair which even his coachman had noticed, to go back with him, then return home on his own, alone and defeated, she must have had, as she pointed him out to Forcheville and said to him: ‘Look! How furious he is!’ the same expression in her eyes, glittering, malicious, haughty and sly, as on the day when Forcheville had driven Saniette from the Verdurins’ house.
Then Swann detested her. 
‘But also, I’m too stupid, he would tell himself, I’m paying with my own money for other people’s pleasures. All the same, she ought to take care and not pull too hard on her bowstring, because I might very well not give anything more at all. In any case, let’s forgo the supplementary favours for the time being! To think that only yesterday, when she said she wanted to attend the season at Bayreuth,80 I was stupid enough to propose renting for the two of us one of the King of Bavaria’s pretty castles in the vicinity. And anyway she did not seem all that delighted, she hasn’t yet said either yes or no; let’s hope she will decide against it. Good Lord! To spend two weeks listening to Wagner with her when she cares as much for it as a fish for an apple – what fun that would be!’ And because his hatred, like his love, needed to manifest itself and to act, he took pleasure in pursuing his evil fantasies farther and farther, since, because of the perfidies he imputed to Odette, he detested her still more and could, if – something he tried to picture to himself – they were found to be true, have an occasion for punishing her and for satiating on her his increasing rage. 
Thus he went so far as to suppose that he was going to receive a letter from her in which she would ask him for money to rent that castle near Bayreuth, but warning him that he could not go there himself, because she had promised Forcheville and the Verdurins that she would invite them. 
Ah! 
How he would have liked her to be so bold! 
What joy he would feel as he refused, as he drafted the vengeful answer, the terms of which he took satisfaction in choosing, in uttering out loud, as if he had actually received the letter!
Yet, this was in fact what happened the very next day. 
She wrote that the Verdurins and their friends had expressed a desire to attend these performances of Wagner and that, if he would be so good as to send her the money, she would at last, after having so often been entertained at their home, have the pleasure of inviting them in her turn. 
About him, she said not a word, it was implied that their presence would exclude his own.
And so that terrible answer, whose every word he had determined the day before without daring to hope that it would ever be used, he could now have the joy of sending off to her. 
Alas! 
He was quite aware that, all the same, with the money she had, or that she might easily find, she could rent something at Bayreuth since she wanted to, she who was incapable of telling the difference between Bach and Clapisson.81 
But still, she would live there more meanly. 
There would be no way, as there would have been had he sent her a few thousand-franc bills this time, of organizing every evening, in a castle, those exquisite suppers after which she would perhaps have indulged the whim – which it was possible she had never yet had – of falling into Forcheville’s arms. 
And then at least he, Swann, was not the one who would be paying for this detested journey! 
– Oh, if only he could have prevented it! if only she could have sprained her ankle before she left, if the coachman of the carriage that would take her to the station had agreed, at no matter what price, to drive her to a place where for some time she would remain sequestered – this perfidious woman, her eyes enamelled by a smile of complicity addressed to Forcheville, which Odette had become for Swann in the past forty-eight hours!
But she was never that for very long; after a few days the gleaming, hypocritical gaze would lose some of its lustre and duplicity, the image of a despised Odette saying to Forcheville: ‘How furious he is!’ would begin to grow pale, fade away. 
Then, gradually the face of the other Odette would reappear and rise up, shining softly, the Odette who also offered a smile to Forcheville, but a smile in which there was nothing but affection for Swann, when she said: ‘Don’t stay long, because this gentleman does not much like me to have visitors when he wants to be with me. Oh, if you knew this creature as well as I know him!’, the same smile she wore when thanking Swann for some instance of his courtesy, which she prized so highly, for some advice she had asked of him in one of those serious circumstances in which she had confidence only in him.
Then, thinking of this Odette, he would ask himself how he could have written her that outrageous letter of which no doubt until now she had not thought him capable, and which must have brought him down from the high, the unique rank which by his goodness, his honesty, he had won in her esteem. 
He would now become less dear to her, because it was for those particular qualities, which she did not find in either Forcheville or any other man, that she loved him. 
It was because of them that Odette so often showed a graciousness towards him that he counted for nothing when he was jealous, because it was not a sign of desire, and even gave proof of affection rather than love, but whose importance he began to feel again in proportion as the spontaneous relaxation of his suspicions, a relaxation often increased by the distraction he found in reading about art or talking to a friend, caused his passion to become less demanding of reciprocities.
Now that, after this oscillation, Odette had naturally returned to the place from which Swann’s jealousy had for a time removed her, to the angle from which he found her charming, he pictured her to himself as full of tenderness, with a look of consent, and so pretty thus that he could not help offering her his lips as if she had been there and he had been able to kiss her; and he felt as strong a gratitude towards her for this enchanting, kindly glance as if she had really given it to him, as if it were not merely his imagination that had just portrayed it in order to satisfy his desire.
How he must have hurt her! 
Of course he could find valid reasons for his resentment against her, but they would not have been enough to make him feel that resentment if he had not loved her so much. 
Had he not had grievances of equal gravity against other women, for whom he would nevertheless readily have done favours now, feeling no anger towards them because he no longer loved them? 
If some day he was ever to find himself in the same state of indifference towards Odette, he would understand that it was his jealousy alone that had made him find something atrocious, unpardonable, in this desire of hers, fundamentally so natural, arising from a slight childishness and also a certain delicacy of soul, to be able in her turn, since an occasion presented itself, to repay some of the civilities of the Verdurins, play mistress of the house.
He returned to this point of view – which was opposed to that of his love and his jealousy, and in which he placed himself sometimes through a sort of intellectual equity in order to allow for the various probabilities – from which he tried to judge Odette as if he had never loved her, as if to him she were a woman like any other, as if Odette’s life had not been, as soon as he was no longer there, different, contrived in hiding from him, plotted against him.
Why should he believe that there, she would enjoy with Forcheville or with other men intoxicating pleasures which she had never experienced with him and which his jealousy alone had fabricated out of nothing? 
In Bayreuth as in Paris, if Forcheville happened to think of him, it might be merely as of someone who mattered a great deal in Odette’s life, to whom he was obliged to yield his place, when they met at her house. 
If Forcheville and she gloated over being there despite him, it was he who would be to blame for it by trying uselessly to prevent her from going, whereas if he had approved of her plan, which was in fact defensible, she would have appeared to be there on his recommendation, she would feel she had been sent there, housed there by him, and for the pleasure she felt in entertaining those people who had entertained her so often, it was to Swann that she would have been grateful.
And – instead of letting her go off on bad terms with him, without having seen him again – if he sent her this money, if he encouraged her to take this trip and went out of his way to make it pleasant for her, she would come running to him, happy, grateful, and he would have the joy of seeing her, a joy which he had not experienced for almost a week and which nothing could replace. 
Because as soon as Swann could picture her without horror, as soon as he again saw kindness in her smile, and as soon as the desire to take her out of reach of all other men was not added by jealousy to his love, that love again became above all a predilection for the sensations that Odette’s person gave him, for the pleasure he took in admiring like a spectacle or questioning like a phenomenon the dawn of one of her glances, the evolution of one of her smiles, the emission of an intonation of her voice. 
And this pleasure, different from all the others, had ended by creating in him a need for her that she alone could satisfy by her presence or her letters, almost as disinterested, almost as artistic, as perverse, as another need that characterized this new period in Swann’s life, in which the dryness, the depression of earlier years had been succeeded by a sort of spiritual over-fullness, without his knowing to what it was that he owed this unhoped-for enrichment of his inner life any more than does a person of delicate health who at a certain moment begins to grow stronger, stouter, and seems for some time to be on the path to a complete recovery: that other need which was also developing apart from the real world was the need to hear, and to know, music.
And so, with the very chemistry of his disease, after he had created jealousy with his love, he began again to manufacture affection, pity for Odette. 
She had turned back into the Odette who was charming and good. 
He felt remorse at having been severe towards her. 
He wanted her to come to him, and, before that, he wanted to procure her some sort of pleasure, so as to see gratitude mould her face and shape her smile.
And Odette, sure of seeing him come after a few days, as tender and submissive as before, to ask her for a reconciliation, acquired the habit of no longer being afraid of displeasing him or even provoking him and she refused him, when it was convenient for her, the favours he valued most.
Perhaps she did not realize how sincere he had been with her during the quarrel, when he had told her he would not send her any money and would try to hurt her. 
Perhaps she also did not realize how sincere he was, if not with her, at least with himself, on other occasions when for the sake of the future of their relationship, so as to show Odette he was capable of doing without her, that a break was always possible, he decided to let some time pass without going to see her.
Sometimes this was after several days during which she had not given him any new reason to worry; and since, from the next few visits he would make to her, he knew he would not derive any very great joy but more probably some vexation that would put an end to his present state of calm, he would write to her that since he was very busy he would not be able to see her on any of the days on which he had said he would. 
Then a letter from her, crossing his, would ask him to change one of those very meetings. 
He would wonder why; his suspicions, his anguish would take hold of him again. 
He would no longer be able to abide, in the new state of agitation in which he found himself, by the commitment he had made in his earlier state of relative calm, he would hurry to her house and demand to see her on all the following days. 
And even if she had not written to him first, if she merely answered, with an acquiescence, his request for a brief separation, this would be enough to make him unable to go on without seeing her. 
For, contrary to Swann’s calculations, Odette’s consent had entirely changed his attitude. 
Like all those who enjoy the possession of a thing, in order to know what would happen if he ceased for a moment to possess it he had removed that thing from his mind, leaving everything else in the same state as when the thing was there. 
But the absence of a thing is not merely that, it is not simply a partial lack, it is a disruption of everything else, it is a new state which one cannot foresee in the old.
But there were other occasions – Odette was about to go off on a trip – when, after some little dispute for which he had chosen the pretext, he would resolve not to write to her and not to see her again before she returned, thus giving the appearance, and expecting the reward, of a more serious quarrel, which she would perhaps believe was final, to a separation the greater part of which was unavoidable because of the trip and which he was merely allowing to begin a little earlier. 
Already he imagined Odette uneasy, distressed at having received neither visit nor letter, and this image, by calming his jealousy, made it easy for him to break himself of the habit of seeing her. 
No doubt, at times, at the far end of his mind where his resolution had thrust her because of the entire interposed length of the three weeks of separation he had accepted, it was with pleasure that he contemplated the idea that he would see Odette again when she returned; but it was also with so little impatience that he began to ask himself if he would not readily double the duration of an abstinence that was so easy. 
It had lasted as yet only three days, a period of time much shorter than he had often spent without seeing Odette and without having as now planned it in advance. 
And yet at this point a slight irritation or physical discomfort – by inciting him to consider the present moment as an exceptional moment, outside the rules, one in which even common wisdom would agree that he could accept the appeasement afforded by a pleasure and allow his will, until it might be useful to resume the effort, to rest – would suspend the action of the latter, which would cease to exert its compression; or, less than that, the memory of something he had forgotten to ask Odette, whether she had decided which colour she wanted to have her carriage repainted, or, with regard to a certain investment, whether it was ordinary or preferred shares that she wanted to buy (it was all very well to show her that he could live without seeing her, but if, after that, the painting had to be done all over again or the shares paid no dividends, a lot of good it would have done him), and like a stretched rubber band that is let go or the air in a pneumatic machine that is opened, the idea of seeing her again would spring back from the far distance where it had been kept into the field of the present as an immediate possibility.
It came back without encountering any further resistance, and was in fact so irresistible that Swann had had much less difficulty feeling the approach one by one of the fifteen days he was going to be separated from Odette than he had waiting the ten minutes which his coachman took to harness the carriage that was going to take him to her house and which he spent in transports of impatience and joy, seizing over and over a thousand times, in order to lavish his tenderness on it, the idea of meeting her again, which, by so abrupt a return, at the moment when he thought it was so far away, was once again with him in his closest consciousness. 
For this thought no longer encountered the obstacle of Swann’s desire to attempt forthwith to resist it, a desire which had ceased to have any place in Swann’s mind since, having proved to himself – at least this was what he believed – that he was so easily capable of it, he no longer saw any disadvantage in deferring an attempt at separation that he was now certain he could put into execution whenever he wished. 
And, too, this idea of seeing her again returned to him adorned with a novelty, a seductiveness, endowed with a virulence which habit had dulled, but which had been retempered in that privation not of three days but of fifteen (for a period of renunciation must be calculated, by anticipation, as having lasted already until the final date assigned to it), and had converted what had been until then an expected pleasure which could easily be sacrificed into an unhoped-for happiness which he was powerless to resist. 
Finally, the idea returned to Swann embellished by his ignorance of what Odette might have thought, perhaps done, seeing that he had given her no sign of life, so that what he was now going to find was the impassioning revelation of an Odette almost unknown to him.
But just as she had believed that his refusal of the money was only a sham, she saw nothing but a pretext in the information that Swann came to ask of her about the carriage to be repainted or the shares to be purchased. 
For she could not reconstruct the various phases of these crises through which he was passing and, in the notion she had formed of them, she did not understand the mechanism by which they worked, and looked only to what she knew beforehand, to their necessary, infallible and always identical termination. 
A notion that was incomplete – and therefore all the more profound, perhaps – if one judged it from the point of view of Swann, who would no doubt have thought he was misunderstood by Odette, just as a morphine addict or a consumptive, persuaded that they have been prevented, one by an outside event just when he was about to free himself of his inveterate habit, the other by an accidental indisposition just when he was about to be restored to health at last, feel misunderstood by the doctor who does not attach the same importance they do to these alleged contingencies, mere disguises according to him, assumed, so as to make themselves perceptible again to his patients, by the vice and the morbid condition which, in reality, have not ceased to burden them incurably while they were feeding their dreams of reformation or recovery. 
And in fact, Swann’s love had reached the stage where the doctor and, in certain affections, even the boldest surgeon, ask themselves if ridding a patient of his vice or relieving him of his disease is still reasonable or even possible.
Certainly, of the extent of this love Swann had no direct awareness. 
When he tried to measure it, it sometimes seemed to him diminished, reduced to almost nothing; for example, the lack of pleasure, the displeasure, almost, inspired in him, before he loved Odette, by her expressive features, her faded complexion, came back to him on certain days. 
‘Really, I’m making some progress, he would say to himself the next day; when I think about it carefully, I hardly enjoyed myself at all yesterday when I was in bed with her: it’s odd, I actually found her ugly.’ And of course, he was sincere, but his love extended well beyond the realms of physical desire. 
Odette’s body itself no longer had a large place in it. 
When his eyes fell upon Odette’s photograph on the table, or when she came to see him, he had trouble identifying the figure of flesh or cardboard with the painful and constant disturbance that inhabited him. 
He would say to himself almost with surprise: ‘It’s she!’ as if suddenly we were shown in a separate, external form one of our own diseases and found that it did not resemble what we were suffering. 
‘She’ – he tried to ask himself what that was; for what love and death have in common, more than those vague qualities that people are always talking about, is that they make us question more deeply, for fear that its reality will slip away from us, the mystery of personality. 
And this disease which was Swann’s love had so proliferated, it was so closely entangled with all Swann’s habits, with all his actions, with his thoughts, his health, his sleep, his life, even with what he wanted after his death, it was now so much a part of him, that it could not have been torn from him without destroying him almost entirely: as they say in surgery, his love was no longer operable.
By this love Swann had been so far detached from all other interests that, when by chance he reappeared in society telling himself that his connections, like an elegant setting that she would not in fact have been able to appreciate with much accuracy, could restore a little of his value in Odette’s eyes (and this would perhaps indeed have been true had these connections not been lowered in value by that love itself, which for Odette depreciated all the things it touched by seeming to proclaim them less precious), what he experienced there, along with the distress of being in places and among people whom she did not know, was the disinterested pleasure he would have taken in a novel or a painting which depicted the amusements of a leisured class, just as, in his own house, he enjoyed contemplating the functioning of his domestic life, the elegance of his wardrobe and livery, the proper placement of his stocks, in the same way that he enjoyed reading in Saint-Simon, who was one of his favourite authors, about the ‘mechanics’ of Mme de Maintenon’s daily life,82 her meals, about the shrewd avarice and grand style of Lully.83 
And to the small extent that this detachment was not absolute, the reason for this new pleasure that Swann was enjoying was that he could emigrate for a while into the rare parts of himself that had remained almost foreign to his love and to his pain. 
In this respect the personality which my great-aunt attributed to him, of ‘young Swann’, distinct from his more individual personality of Charles Swann, was the one in which he was now happiest. 
One day when, for the birthday of the Princess of Parma (and because she could often please Odette indirectly by making it possible for her to have seats at galas, jubilees, and other occasions), he had wanted to send her some fruit and was not sure how to order it, he had entrusted the task to a cousin of his mother’s, a lady who, delighted to do an errand for him, had written to him, when sending him the account, that she had not got all the fruit at the same place, but the grapes at Crapote’s, whose specialty they were, the strawberries at Jauret’s, the pears at Chevet’s, where they were the loveliest, etc., ‘each piece of fruit inspected and examined individually by me’. 
And indeed, from the Princess’s thanks, he had been able to judge the flavour of the strawberries and the mellowness of the pears. 
But more importantly, that ‘each piece of fruit inspected and examined individually by me’ had soothed his pain, by taking his consciousness away into a region where he rarely went, even though it was his by right as the heir to a rich and solid bourgeois family in which had been preserved by heredity, quite ready to be put at his service whenever he wished, a knowledge of the ‘best addresses’ and the art of placing a proper order.
Certainly, he had forgotten he was ‘young Swann’ for too long not to feel, when he became that person again briefly, a keener pleasure than those he might have felt at other times and which had palled; and if the friendliness of the bourgeoisie, for whom he had remained that person more than anything else, was less keen than that of the aristocracy (but in fact more flattering, for with them at least it is always inseparable from respect), a letter from a royal personage, whatever princely entertainment it offered, could never be as pleasant to him as a letter asking him to be a witness, or merely to be present, at a wedding in the family of old friends of his parents, some of whom had continued to see him – like my grandfather, who, the year before, had invited him to my mother’s wedding – while certain others barely knew him personally but believed they were obligated to be polite to the son, to the worthy successor, of the late M. Swann.
But, because of the already long-standing close ties he had among them, the nobility, to a certain extent, were also part of his house, his household and his family. 
He felt, when contemplating his distinguished friendships, the same external support, the same comfort, as when looking at the beautiful lands, the beautiful silverware, the beautiful table linen, that had come to him from his own people. 
And the thought that if he were to collapse at home from the effects of a sudden illness it would quite naturally be the Duc de Chartres, the Prince de Reuss, the Duke of Luxembourg and the Baron de Charlus whom his valet would run off to find, brought him the same consolation as to our old Françoise the knowledge that she would be wrapped in a shroud of her own fine sheets, marked, not mended (or so finely that it gave only a loftier idea of the care of the seamstress), a shroud from the frequent image of which in her mind’s eye she derived a certain satisfactory sense, if not of material well-being, at least of self-respect. 
But most importantly, since in every one of his actions and thoughts that referred to Odette, Swann was constantly governed and directed by the unavowed feeling that he was, perhaps not less dear, but less welcome to her than anyone else, than the most boring faithful of the Verdurins – when he returned to a world in which he was the highest example of excellence, whom one would do anything to attract, whom one was sorry not to see, he began to believe again in the existence of a happier life, almost to feel an appetite for it, as an invalid may feel who has been bedridden for months, on a strict diet, and who sees in a newspaper the menu for an official luncheon or an advertisement for a cruise to Sicily.
Even when he could not find out where she had gone, it would have been enough to soothe the anguish which he felt at these times, and for which Odette’s presence, the sweetness of being close to her was the only specific (a specific that in the long run aggravated the disease, like many remedies, but at least momentarily soothed his pain), it would have been enough for him, if only Odette had permitted it, to remain in her house while she was out, to wait for her there until the hour of her return, into whose stillness and appeasement would have flowed and melted the hours which some magical illusion, some evil spell had made him believe were different from the rest. 
But she did not want this; he returned home; he forced himself, on the way, to make various plans, he stopped thinking about Odette; he even succeeded, while he was undressing, in turning over some fairly cheerful thoughts in his mind; and it was with a light heart, full of the hope of going to see some great painting the next day, that he got into bed and put out his light; but, no sooner, as he prepared to go to sleep, did he cease to exert upon himself a constraint of which he was not even aware because it was by now so habitual, than at that very instant an icy shiver would run through him and he would begin to sob. 
He did not even want to know why, dried his eyes, said to himself with a smile: ‘Delightful – I’m turning into a real neurotic.’ Then he could not think without a feeling of great weariness that the next day he would again have to begin trying to find out what Odette had been doing, use all his influence to attempt to see her. 
This compulsion to an activity without respite, without variety, without results was so cruel to him that one day, seeing a lump on his abdomen, he felt real joy at the thought that he might have a fatal tumor, that he was no longer going to have to take charge of anything, that it was the disease that would manage him, make him its plaything, until the impending end. 
And indeed if, during this period, he often desired death though without admitting it to himself, it was to escape not so much the acuteness of his sufferings as the monotony of his struggle.
And yet he would have liked to live on until the time came when he no longer loved her, when she would have no reason to lie to him and he could at last learn from her if, on the day when he had gone to see her in the afternoon, she was or was not in bed with Forcheville. 
Often for several days, the suspicion that she loved someone else would distract him from that question about Forcheville, would make it a matter almost of indifference to him, like those new developments in a continuing state of ill health which seem momentarily to have delivered us from the preceding ones. 
There were even days when he was not tormented by any suspicion. 
He thought he was cured. 
But the next morning, when he woke up, he felt in the same place the same pain, the sensation of which, in the course of the preceding day, he had diluted in a flood of different impressions. 
But it had not moved from its place. 
And in fact, it was the sharpness of this pain that had woken Swann.
Since Odette did not give him any information about these very important things which occupied her so fully each day (although he had lived long enough to know that these things are never anything else but pleasures), he could not try to imagine them for very long at a time, his brain was working with nothing in it; then he would pass his finger over his tired eyelids as he would have wiped the glass of his lorgnon, and stop thinking altogether. 
Yet floating up from that great unknown were certain occupations which reappeared from time to time, vaguely connected by her to some obligation towards distant relatives or friends from an earlier time, who, because they were the only ones she regularly mentioned to him as preventing her from seeing him, seemed to Swann to form the stable, necessary framework of Odette’s life. 
Because of the tone in which she referred from time to time to ‘the day I go to the Hippodrome with my friend’, if, having felt ill and thought: ‘Perhaps Odette would be kind enough to come round to the house,’ he recalled abruptly that this was in fact that very day, he would say to himself: ‘Oh no! It’s not worth the trouble of asking her to come, I should have thought of it earlier, this is the day she goes to the Hippodrome with her friend. We must confine ourselves to what’s possible; it’s pointless wearing oneself out proposing things that are unacceptable and have already been refused in advance.’ And the duty incumbent upon Odette of going to the Hippodrome, to which Swann thus yielded, did not appear to him merely unavoidable; but the mark of necessity with which it was stamped seemed to make plausible and legitimate everything that was closely or distantly related to it. 
If, after a man passing in the street had greeted Odette and aroused Swann’s jealousy, she answered his questions by associating the stranger with one of the two or three paramount duties of which she had spoken to him, if, for example, she said: ‘That was a gentleman who was in the box of the friend with whom I go to the Hippodrome,’ this explanation would calm Swann’s suspicions, since he did indeed find it inevitable that the friend would have other guests besides Odette in her box at the Hippodrome, but had never tried or managed to picture them. 
Ah! how he would have liked to know her, the friend who went to the Hippodrome, and how he would have liked her to take him there with Odette! 
How gladly he would have given up all his connections in exchange for any person Odette was in the habit of seeing, even a manicurist or a shop assistant! 
He would have gone to more trouble for that person than for a queen. 
Wouldn’t she have given him, with what she contained of Odette’s life, the only effective calmative for his pain? 
How happily he would have hurried to spend the days at the home of one of those humble people with whom Odette kept up friendly relations out of either self-interest or true simplicity! 
How willingly he would have taken up residence for ever on the fifth floor of a certain sordid and coveted house to which Odette did not take him and in which, if he had lived there with the little retired dressmaker whose lover he would willingly have pretended to be, he would have had a visit from her almost every day! 
In these almost working-class neighbourhoods, what a modest life, abject, but sweet, nourished with calm and happiness, he would have agreed to live indefinitely!
It also sometimes happened that when, after meeting Swann, she saw some man approaching her whom he did not know, he could observe on Odette’s face the sadness she had shown the day he had come to see her while Forcheville was there. 
But this was rare; for on the days when, despite everything she had to do and her fear of what other people would think, she managed to see Swann, what now predominated in her attitude was assurance: a great contrast, perhaps an unconscious revenge or a natural reaction to the timorous emotion which, in the early days when she had known him, she had felt with him, and even far away from him, when she would begin a letter with these words: ‘My dear, my hand is shaking so hard I can scarcely write’ (at least so she claimed, and a little of that emotion must have been sincere for her to want to feign more of it). 
She liked Swann then. 
We do not tremble except for ourselves, except for those we love. 
When our happiness is no longer in their hands, what calm, what ease, what boldness we enjoy in their company! 
When speaking to him, when writing to him, she no longer used any of those words with which she had sought to give herself the illusion that he belonged to her, creating occasions for saying ‘my’, ‘mine’, when she referred to him – ‘You are my property, this is the fragrance of our friendship, I’m keeping it’ – and for talking to him about the future, about death even, as a single thing that would be shared by the two of them. 
In those days, to everything he said, she would answer admiringly: ‘You – you will never be like anyone else’; she would look at his long face, his slightly bald head, about which the people who knew of Swann’s successes with women would think: ‘He’s not conventionally handsome, granted, but he is smart: that quiff of hair, that monocle, that smile!’, and, perhaps with more curiosity to know what he was than desire to become his mistress, she would say: ‘If only I could know what is in that head!’
Now, to all of Swann’s remarks she would reply in a tone that was at times irritated, at times indulgent: ‘Oh, you really never will be like anyone else!’ She would look at that head, which was only a little more aged by worry (but about which now everyone thought, with that same aptitude which enables you to discover the intentions of a symphonic piece when you have read the programme, and the resemblances of a child when you know its parents: ‘He’s not positively ugly, granted, but he is absurd; that monocle, that quiff of hair, that smile!’ creating in their suggestible imaginations the immaterial demarcation that separates by several months’ distance the head of an adored lover from the head of a cuckold), she would say: ‘Oh, if only I could change what’s in that head, if only I could make it reasonable.’
Always prepared to believe what he hoped for, if Odette’s behaviour towards him left any room at all for doubt, he would throw himself avidly on that remark:
And he would try to show her that to soothe him, direct him, make him work, would be a noble task to which many other women might ask nothing better than to devote themselves, though it would only be fair to add that in their hands the noble task would have appeared to him merely an indiscreet and intolerable usurpation of his freedom. 
‘If she did not love me a little, he would say to himself, she would not want to transform me. In order to transform me, she will have to see more of me.’ Thus he regarded this reproach of hers as a sort of proof of interest, of love perhaps; and indeed, she now gave him so few that he was obliged to regard as such the prohibitions she imposed on him against one thing or another. 
One day, she declared that she did not like his coachman, that he was perhaps turning Swann against her, that in any case he did not show the punctuality and the deference to Swann that she wanted. 
She felt that he longed to hear her say: ‘Don’t use him any more when you come to see me,’ as he would have longed for a kiss. 
Since she was in a good mood, she said it; he was touched. 
That evening, chatting with M. de Charlus, with whom he had the comfort of being able to talk about her openly (for the least bit of conversation he had, even with people who did not know her, always somehow related to her), he said to him:
– Yet I believe she loves me; she is so kind to me, what I do is certainly not a matter of indifference to her. 
And if, when he was setting off for her house, getting into his carriage with a friend whom he was to drop along the way, the friend said: ‘Why, that’s not Lorédan on the box!’, with what melancholy joy Swann would answer him:
– Oh Lord no! 
I tell you I can’t use Lorédan when I go to the rue La Pérouse. 
Odette doesn’t like me to use Lorédan, she doesn’t think he’s good for me. 
Well, what do you expect! 
Women, you know, women! 
I tell you she wouldn’t like it at all. 
Oh, lord, yes; if I’d used Rémi, there’d be no end of trouble!
This new manner, indifferent, distracted, irritable, which was now Odette’s manner with him, certainly caused Swann to suffer; but he was not aware of his suffering; since it was only gradually, day by day, that Odette had cooled towards him, it was only by comparing what she was now to what she had been in the beginning that he would have been able to fathom the depth of the change that had taken place. 
Yet that change was his profound, his secret wound which hurt him day and night, and as soon as he felt that his thoughts were going a little too close to it, he would quickly guide them in another direction for fear of suffering too much. 
He would certainly say to himself in an abstract way: ‘There was a time when Odette loved me more,’ but he would never look back at that time. 
Just as there was a bureau in his office which he took pains not to look at, which he made a detour to avoid as he came and went, because in one of its drawers were stowed the chrysanthemum she had given him that first evening on which he had driven her home, and the letters in which she had said: ‘If you had forgotten your heart here too, I would not have let you take it back,’ and ‘At whatever hour of the day or night you need me, send word and my life will be yours to command,’ in the same way there was a place in him which he never let his thoughts approach, when necessary forcing them to make the detour of a lengthy argument so that they would not have to pass in front of it: this was the place in which lived the memory of the happy days.
But his meticulous prudence was foiled one evening when he had gone out to a fashionable party.
It was at the home of the Marquise de Saint-Euverte, on the last, for that year, of the evenings on which she invited people to hear the musicians who were afterwards used by her for her charity concerts. 
Swann, who had wanted to go to each of the preceding evenings in turn and had not been able to resolve to do it, had received, while he was dressing to go to this one, a visit from the Baron de Charlus, who was coming with an offer to return with him to the home of the Marquise, if his company would help him to be a little less bored there, a little less sad. 
But Swann had answered:
– You can’t doubt how much pleasure I would take in being with you. 
But the greatest pleasure you could give me would be to go to see Odette instead. 
You know what an excellent influence you have on her. 
I believe she’s not going out this evening before she goes to see her old dressmaker, and I’m sure she’d be delighted to have you accompany her there. 
In any case you’ll find her at home before that. 
Try to amuse her and also to talk some sense to her. 
If you could arrange something for tomorrow that she enjoys and that we could all three do together… Also, try to begin planning for this summer, see if there’s something she might want to do, a cruise we could all three take, I don’t know. 
I’m not counting on seeing her tonight myself; still, if she wanted to see me or if you were to find a way, you would only need to send me word at Mme de Saint-Euverte’s up to midnight, and afterwards at home. 
Thank you for all that you do for me – you know how fond I am of you.
The Baron promised to go and pay the visit that Swann wanted after he had driven him to the door of the Saint-Euverte house, where Swann arrived soothed by the thought that M. de Charlus would be spending the evening in the rue La Pérouse, but in a state of melancholy indifference to everything that did not concern Odette, and in particular to the accoutrements of fashionable life, which gave them the charm that is to be found in anything which, being no longer an object of our desire, appears to us as itself alone. 
As soon as he descended from the carriage, in the foreground of that fictitious summary of their domestic life which hostesses like to offer their guests on ceremonial occasions and in which they seek to respect accuracy in costume and setting, Swann enjoyed the sight of the descendants of Balzac’s ‘tigers’,86 the grooms, who normally followed along on the daily outing, now hatted and booted and posted outside in front of the house on the soil of the avenue, or in front of the stables, like gardeners lined up at the entrances to their flower-beds. 
The particular tendency he had always had to look for analogies between living people and portraits in museums was still active but in a more constant and general way; it was society as a whole, now that he was detached from it, which presented itself to him as a series of pictures. 
In the hall which in the old days, when he went out regularly into society, he would walk into wrapped in his overcoat and leave in his tails, but without knowing what had happened there, his mind having been, during the few moments he had stayed there, either still at the party he had just left, or already at the party he was about to be shown into, for the first time he noticed, woken by the unexpected arrival of the late guest, the scattered pack of tall, magnificent, idle footmen sleeping here and there on benches and chests who, raising their noble, sharp, greyhound profiles, stood up and gathered in a circle around him.
One of them, of a particularly ferocious aspect and rather like the executioner in certain Renaissance paintings depicting torture scenes, advanced upon him with an implacable air to take his things. 
But the hardness of his steely look was compensated for by the softness of his cotton gloves, so that as he approached Swann he seemed to be showing contempt for his person and consideration for his hat. 
He took it with a care to which the exactness of his balance gave something meticulous, and with a delicacy which was rendered almost touching by the evidence of his strength. 
Then he passed it to one of his assistants, new and timid, who expressed the terror he felt by casting wild glances in all directions and displayed the agitation of a captive animal in the first hours of its domestication.
A few steps away, a sturdy fellow in livery mused motionless, statuesque, useless, like the purely decorative warrior one sees in the most tumultuous paintings by Mantegna,87 lost in thought, leaning on his shield, while others beside him rush forward and slaughter one another; detached from his group of companions as they pressed around Swann, he seemed as resolved to take no part in this scene, which he followed vaguely with his cruel sea-green eyes, as if it were the Massacre of the Innocents or the Martyrdom of Saint John. 
He seemed in fact to belong to that race which has vanished – or which perhaps never existed except in the altarpiece of San Zeno and the frescoes of the Erimitani, where Swann had come in contact with it and where it dreams on still – and which issued from the impregnation of an ancient statue by one of the Master’s Paduan models or some Albrecht Dürer Saxon.88 
And the locks of his red hair, crimped by nature but glued by brilliantine, were treated broadly as they are in the Greek sculpture which the painter from Mantua studied so constantly and which, if out of all creation it depicts only man, is at least able to derive from his simple forms richnesses so varied, as though borrowed from all of living nature, that a head of hair, in the smooth rolls and sharp beaks of its curls, or in the superimposition of the threefold flowering diadem of its tresses, looks at once like a bundle of seaweed, a nestful of doves, a band of hyacinths and a coil of snakes.
Still others, also colossal, stood on the steps of a monumental staircase to which their decorative presence and marmoreal immobility might have induced one to give the same name as the one in the Ducal Palace – ‘Staircase of the Giants’ – and which Swann began to climb with the sad thought that Odette had never ascended it. 
Oh, with what joy by contrast would he have gone up the dark, evil-smelling and rickety flights to the little retired dressmaker’s, in whose ‘fifth floor’ he would have been so happy to pay more than the price of a weekly stage-box at the Opéra for the right to spend the evening when Odette came there, and even on the other days, so as to be able to talk about her, live among the people she was in the habit of seeing when he was not there and who because of that seemed to him to harbour something, of his mistress’s life, that was more real, more inaccessible and more mysterious. 
Whereas in the old dressmaker’s pestilential and longed-for staircase, since there was no second, service stair, one saw in the evening in front of each door an empty, dirty milk-can set out in readiness on the mat, on the magnificent and disdained staircase which Swann was mounting at that moment, on either side, at different levels, in front of each anfractuosity formed in the wall by the window of the lodge or the entrance to a set of rooms, representing the domestic service which they directed and paying homage to the guests on their behalf, a concierge, a majordomo, a steward (good people who lived the rest of the week somewhat independent in their domains, dined there at home like small shopkeepers and by tomorrow would perhaps be in the bourgeois service of a doctor or manufacturer), heedful not to fail to carry out the instructions they had been given before being allowed to put on the dazzling livery which they wore only at rare intervals and in which they did not feel very much at ease, stood under the arcature of their portals with a stately glitter tempered by common good nature, like saints in their niches; and an enormous usher, dressed as though he were in church, struck the flagstones with his staff as each new arrival passed. 
Having reached the top of the staircase up the length of which he had been followed by a wan-faced servant with a little bunch of hair tied in a cadogan89 at the back of his head, like a Goya90 sexton or a scrivener in an old play, Swann passed in front of a desk where valets, seated like notaries in front of great registers, stood up and inscribed his name. 
He then crossed a little vestibule which – like certain rooms arranged by their owners to serve as the setting for a single work of art, from which they take their name and, deliberately bare, contain nothing else – displayed at its entrance, like some precious effigy by Benvenuto Cellini91 representing a watchman, a young footman, his body bent slightly forward, lifting from his red gorget a face even redder from which burst forth torrents of fire, timidity and zeal, and who, piercing with his impetuous, vigilant, distracted gaze the Aubusson tapestries hung before the drawing-room where people were listening to music, appeared, with a military impassiveness or a supernatural faith – an allegory of alarm, incarnation of alertness, commemoration of the call to arms – to be watching, angel or sentinel, from the tower of a castle or cathedral, for the appearance of the enemy or the hour of Judgment. 
Now Swann had only to enter the concert-room, the doors of which an usher loaded with chains was opening for him with a bow, as he would have handed over to him the keys to a city. 
But he thought of the house in which he might have been at that very moment, if Odette had permitted it, and the memory he glimpsed of an empty milk-can on a doormat wrung his heart.
Swann rapidly recovered his sense of how ugly men could be, when, beyond the tapestry hangings, the spectacle of the servants was followed by that of the guests. 
But even the ugliness of these faces, though he knew it so well, seemed new to him since their features – instead of being signs useable in a practical way for the identification of a certain person who had until then represented a cluster of pleasures to pursue, of worries to avoid, or of courtesies to pay – now rested, coordinated only by aesthetic relations, in the autonomy of their lines. 
And in these men in the midst of whom Swann found himself hemmed in, even the monocles that many wore (and which, formerly, would at the very most have allowed Swann to say that they wore a monocle), having now been released from signifying a habit, the same for everyone, each appeared to him with a sort of individuality. 
Maybe because he did not regard Général de Froberville and the Marquis de Bréauté, who were talking to each other just inside the door, as more than two figures in a painting, whereas for a long time they had been useful friends who had introduced him to the Jockey Club and supported him in duels, the general’s monocle, stuck between his eyelids like a shell-splinter in his vulgar, scarred, overbearing face, in the middle of a forehead which it blinded like the Cyclops’ single eye, appeared to Swann like a monstrous wound that might have been glorious to receive, but that was indecent to show off; whereas the one that M. de Bréauté added, as a badge of festivity, to the pearl grey gloves, the opera hat, and the white tie, and substituted for the familiar lorgnette (as Swann himself did) for going out in society, bore, glued to its other side, like a natural history specimen under a microscope, an infinitesimal gaze teeming with friendliness that smiled constantly at the loftiness of the ceilings, the beauty of the preparations, the interest of the programmes and the quality of the refreshments.
– Well now, here you are! 
Why, it’s been an eternity since we last saw you, said the Général to Swann and, noticing his drawn features and concluding from this that it was perhaps a grave illness that had kept him away from society, he added: ‘You look quite well, you know!’ while M. de Bréauté asked: ‘My dear, what in the world are you doing here?’ of a society novelist who had just settled into the corner of his eye a monocle which was his only organ of psychological investigation and pitiless analysis and answered with an air of mystery and self-importance, rolling the r:
The Marquis de Forestelle’s monocle was minuscule, had no border and, requiring a constant painful clenching of the eye, where it was incrusted like a superfluous cartlilage whose presence was inexplicable and whose material was exquisite, gave the Marquis’s face a melancholy delicacy, and made women think he was capable of suffering greatly in love. 
But that of M. de Saint-Candé, surrounded by a gigantic ring, like Saturn, was the centre of gravity of a face which regulated itself at each moment in relation to it, a face whose quivering red nose and thick-lipped sarcastic mouth attempted by their grimaces to equal the unceasing salvoes of wit sparkling from the disk of glass, and saw itself preferred to the handsomest eyes in the world by snobbish and depraved young women in whom it inspired dreams of artifical charms and a refinement of voluptuousness; and meanwhile, behind his own, M. de Palancy, who, with his big, round-eyed carp’s head, moved about slowly in the midst of the festivities unclenching his mandibles from moment to moment as though seeking to orient himself, merely seemed to be transporting with him an accidental and perhaps purely symbolic fragment of the glass of his aquarium, a part intended to represent the whole, reminding Swann, a great admirer of Giotto’s Vices and Virtues at Padua, of Injustice, next to whom a leafy bough evokes the forests in which his lair is hidden.
Swann had walked on into the room, at the insistence of Mme de Saint-Euverte, and in order to hear a melody from Orphée92 that was being performed by a flautist, had placed himself in a corner where unfortunately his only view was of two mature ladies seated next to each other, the Marquise de Cambremer and the Vicomtesse de Franquetot, who, because they were cousins, spent all their time at parties, clutching their bags and followed by their daughters, looking for each other as though in a railway-station and did not rest easy until they had reserved, with a fan or a handkerchief, two seats side by side: Mme de Cambremer, since she had very few acquaintances, being all the happier to have a companion, Mme de Franquetot, who was in contrast extremely well connected, believing there was something elegant, something original, about showing all her fine friends that she preferred, to their company, an obscure lady with whom she shared memories of her youth. 
Full of a melancholy irony, Swann watched them as they listened to the piano intermezzo (‘Saint Francis Preaching to the Birds’ by Liszt)93 which had come after the flute melody, and as they followed the vertiginous playing of the virtuoso, Mme de Franquetot anxiously, her eyes wild as if the keys over which he ran with such agility were a series of trapezes from which he might fall from a height of eighty metres, and at the same time casting at her neighbour looks of astonishment, of denial which signified: ‘This is not to be believed, I would never have thought a man could do this,’ Mme de Cambremer, as a woman who had received a strong musical education, marking time with her head transformed into the arm of a metronome of which the amplitude and rapidity of oscillations from one shoulder to the other had become such (with that sort of frenzy and abandon in the eyes characteristic of a kind of suffering which is no longer aware of itself nor tries to control itself and says ‘I can’t help it!’) that she kept snagging her solitaires in the straps of her bodice and was obliged to straighten the black grapes she had in her hair, though without ceasing to accelerate her motion. 
On the other side of Mme de Franquetot, but a little in front, was the Marquise de Gallardon, occupied with her favourite thought, the alliance which she had with the Guermantes and which in the eyes of the world and in her own was the source of a good deal of glory along with some shame, the most brilliant of them keeping her a bit at a distance, perhaps because she was tiresome, or because she was spiteful, or because she was from an inferior branch, or perhaps for no reason. 
When she found herself next to someone she did not know, as at this moment next to Mme de Franquetot, it would pain her that the awareness she had of her kinship with the Guermantes could not be manifested outwardly in visible characters like those which, in the mosaics of the Byzantine churches, placed one below another, inscribe in a vertical column, next to a holy personage, the words that he is supposed to be uttering. 
At this moment she was pondering the fact that she had never received an invitation or a visit from her young cousin the Princesse des Laumes, in the six years the Princesse had been married. 
This thought filled her with anger, but also with pride; for, by dint of saying to people who were surprised not to see her at the home of Mme des Laumes, that it was because she would have risked meeting Princesse Mathilde94 there – for which her ultra-Legitimist family would never have forgiven her – she had ended by believing this actually was the reason she did not go to her young cousin’s house. 
Yet she recalled having asked Mme des Laumes several times how she could contrive to meet her, but recalled it only confusedly and also more than neutralized this slightly humiliating memory by murmuring: ‘After all it’s not up to me to make the first move, I’m twenty years older than she.’ Empowered by the virtue of these interior words, she proudly threw back her shoulders, which seemed detached from her bust and on which her head was positioned almost horizontally so that one was reminded of the ‘restored’ head of a proud pheasant that is brought to a table with all its feathers. 
It was not so much that she was not stocky, mannish and plump by nature; but the insults she had received had straightened her up like those trees which, born in a bad position at the brink of a precipice, are forced to grow backwards to keep their balance. 
Obliged, in order to console herself for not being altogether the equal of the other Guermantes, to keep telling herself that it was because of the intransigence of her principles and her pride that she did not see them very often, this thought had ended by shaping her body and by giving her an imposing sort of presence that passed in the eyes of bourgeois women for a sign of breeding and sometimes disturbed with a fleeting desire the weary glances of the clubmen. 
If Mme de Gallardon’s conversation had been subjected to those analyses which, by recording the greater or lesser frequency of each word, permit one to discover the key to a language in code, one would have realized that no expression, even the most ordinary, recurred in it as often as ‘at the home of my cousins the Guermantes’, ‘at the home of my Aunt de Guermantes’, ‘the health of Elzéar de Guermantes’, ‘my cousin de Guermantes’s baignoire’.95 
When anyone spoke to her about a famous personage, she would answer that without knowing him personally she had met him a thousand times at the home of her Aunt de Guermantes, but she would answer this in a tone so icy and in a voice so low that it was clear that, if she did not know him personally, it was by virtue of all the ineradicable and stubborn principles which her shoulders touched behind her, like those ladders on which gymnastics instructors make you stretch out in order to develop your chest.
Now as it happened, the Princesse des Laumes, whom one would not have expected to see at Mme de Saint-Euverte’s, had just arrived. 
In order to show that she was not trying to advertise, in a drawing-room to which she had come only out of condescension, the superiority of her rank, she had entered with her shoulders turned sideways even where there was no crowd to cleave through and no person attempting to get past her, staying deliberately at the back, with the air of being in her proper place, like a king who stands in line at the door of a theatre so long as the management have not been informed that he is there; and, merely confining her gaze – so as not to seem to be signalling her presence and demanding attention – to a consideration of the design in the carpet or in her own skirt, she stood in the spot that had seemed to her the most modest (and from which she was well aware she would be drawn by a delighted exclamation from Mme de Saint-Euverte as soon as the latter noticed her), next to Mme de Cambremer, whom she did not know. 
She observed the pantomime of her music-loving neighbour, but did not imitate it. 
It was not that, the one time she came to spend five minutes at Mme de Saint-Euverte’s, the Princesse des Laumes would not have wished, so that the courtesy she was showing her might count double, to prove as friendly as possible. 
But by nature, she had a horror of what she called ‘exaggerations’ and was anxious to show that she ‘did not have to’ indulge in displays of emotion which were not in keeping with the ‘style’ of the circle she moved in, but which still, on the other hand, could not help but impress her, by virtue of that spirit of imitation akin to timidity which is developed in the most confident persons by the atmosphere of a new environment, even if it is an inferior one. 
She began to wonder if this gesticulation was not perhaps a necessary response to the piece being played, which did not come quite within the scope of the music she had heard up to now, if to refrain was not to give proof of incomprehension with respect to the work and impropriety towards the lady of the house: so that, in order to express both of her contradictory inclinations by a compromise, she first merely straightened up her shoulder-straps or put a hand to her blonde hair to secure the little balls of coral or pink enamel flecked with diamonds which formed her simple and charming coiffure, while at the same time examining her ardent neighbour with cold curiosity, then with her fan she beat time for a moment, but, so as not to forfeit her independence, on the off-beat. 
When the pianist ended the piece by Liszt and begun a prelude by Chopin, Mme de Cambremer gave Mme de Franquetot a fond smile of competent satisfaction and allusion to the past. 
When she was young she had learned to caress the phrases of Chopin with their sinuous and excessively long necks, so free, so flexible, so tactile, which begin by seeking out and exploring a place for themselves far outside and away from the direction in which they started, far beyond the point which one might have expected them to reach, and which frolic in this fantasy distance only to come back more deliberately – with a more premeditated return, with more precision, as though upon a crystal glass that resonates until you cry out – to strike you in the heart.
Living in a provincial family that had few friends, scarcely ever going out to a ball, she had intoxicated herself in the solitude of her manor house, with all those imaginary dancing couples, now slowing them, now speeding them, now scattering them like flowers, now leaving the ball for a moment to hear the wind blow in the pine trees, at the edge of the lake, and suddenly seeing, as he came towards her there, more unlike anything anyone had ever dreamed of than an earthly lover could be, a slender young man in white gloves whose voice had a strange and false lilt to it. 
But nowadays the old-fashioned beauty of that music seemed stale. 
Having fallen in the esteem of the discriminating public over the past several years, it had lost its position of distinction and its charm, and even those whose taste is bad no longer took more than an unacknowledged and moderate pleasure in it. 
Mme de Cambremer cast a furtive glance behind her. 
She knew that her young daughter-in-law (full of respect for her new family, except regarding the things of the mind about which, since she knew a little harmony and even some Greek, she was especially enlightened) despised Chopin and suffered when she heard it played. 
But far away from the surveillance of that Wagnerian who was off in the distance with a group of people her own age, Mme de Cambremer abandoned herself to her delightful impressions. 
The Princesse des Laumes was enjoying them too. 
Though without a natural gift for music, she had had lessons fifteen years earlier from a piano teacher of the Faubourg Saint-Germain, a woman of genius who at the end of her life had been reduced to poverty and had returned, at the age of seventy, to giving piano lessons, to the daughters and grand-daughters of her old pupils. 
She was dead now. 
But her method, her lovely sound, came back to life sometimes under the fingers of her pupils, even those who had become in other respects ordinary people, had abandoned music and almost never opened a piano any more. 
And so Mme des Laumes could shake her head, with expert knowledge, with a just appreciation of the way the pianist was playing this prelude, which she knew by heart. 
The end of the phrase he had begun already sang on her lips. 
And she murmured, ‘It’s always charming,’ with a double ch at the start of the word which was a mark of refinement and which, she felt, crinkled her lips so romantically like a beautiful flower, that she instinctively brought her eyes into harmony with them by giving them an expression just then of sentimentality and vague yearning. 
Meanwhile, Mme de Gallardon was saying to herself how annoying it was that she only very rarely had the opportunity to meet the Princesse des Laumes, for she wanted to teach her a lesson by not responding to her greeting. 
She did not know her cousin was there. 
A movement of Mme de Franquetot’s head revealed the Princesse to her. 
Immediately she hurried towards her, disturbing everyone; but though she wanted to preserve a haughty and glacial manner which would remind everyone that she did not wish to be on friendly terms with a person in whose house one might find oneself coming face to face with Princesse Mathilde, and to whom it was not for her to make advances since she was not ‘of her generation’, still she wanted to offset this air of haughtiness and reserve by some remark that would justify her overture and force the Princesse to engage in conversation; and so when she came near her cousin, Mme de Gallardon, with a hard expression and a hand out-thrust like a ‘forced’ card, said to her: ‘How is your husband?’ in the concerned tone she would have used if the Prince had been gravely ill. 
The Princesse, bursting into a laugh which was peculiar to her and which was intended at once to show others that she was making fun of someone and also to make herself look prettier by concentrating her features around her animated lips and sparkling eyes, answered:
And she laughed again. 
Whereupon Mme de Gallardon, drawing herself up and contriving an expression which was even chillier, yet still concerned about the Prince’s condition, said to her cousin:
– Oriane (here Mme des Laumes looked with an air of surprise and merriment at an invisible third party in whose presence she seemed to be anxious to attest that she had never authorized Mme de Gallardon to call her by her first name), I would be so pleased if you could stop by my house for a moment tomorrow evening to hear a clarinet quintet by Mozart. 
I would like to have your opinion.
She seemed not to be offering an invitation, but to be asking a favour, and to need the Princesse’s assessment of the Mozart quintet as if it were a dish composed by a new cook about whose talents it was valuable to her to obtain the opinion of a gourmet.
– But I know that quintet. 
I can tell you right now… I like it!
– You know, my husband isn’t well; it’s his liver… It would give him great pleasure to see you, resumed Mme de Gallardon, now placing the Princesse under a charitable obligation to appear at her soirée.
The Princesse never liked to tell people she did not want to go to their homes. 
Every day she would write notes expressing her regrets at having been prevented – by an unexpected visit from her mother-in-law, an invitation from her brother-in-law, the opera, an expedition to the country – from attending a soirée to which she would never have dreamed of going. 
In this way she gave many people the joy of believing that she was one of their friends, that she would readily have gone to visit them, that she had been kept from doing so only by princely inconveniences which they were flattered to see enter into competition with their soirée. 
Then, too, since she was part of that witty circle of the Guermantes in which something survived of the alert mentality unburdened by platitudes and conventional feelings which was handed down from Mérimée96 and had found its latest expression in the theatre of Meilhac and Halévy,97 she adapted it even to social relations, transposed it even into her politeness, which endeavoured to be positive and precise, and to approximate the plain truth. 
She would never develop at any length to a hostess the expression of her desire to be present at her party; she thought it friendlier to put to her a few little facts on which it would depend whether or not it was possible for her to come.
– The thing is, she said to Mme de Gallardon, tomorrow evening I have to go to see a friend who has been asking me to make a date with her for ages. 
If she takes us to the theatre, even with the best will in the world there won’t be any chance of my coming to you; but if we stay in the house, since I know we’ll be alone, I’ll be able to leave her.
– Oh, by the way, did you see your friend M. Swann?
– Why no! 
My beloved Charles, I didn’t know he was here, I must try to attract his attention.
– It’s funny that he should go to old Saint-Euverte’s, said Mme de Gallardon. 
Oh, I know he’s intelligent, she added, meaning he was a schemer, but still and all, a Jew in the home of the sister and sister-in-law of two archbishops!
– I confess to my shame that I’m not shocked, said the Princesse des Laumes.
– I know he’s a convert, and even his parents and grandparents before him. 
But they do say converts remain more attached to their religion than anyone else, that it’s all just a pretence. 
Is that true?
The pianist, who was to play two pieces by Chopin, after finishing the prelude had immediately attacked a polonaise. 
But now that Mme de Gallardon had told her cousin that Swann was there, Chopin himself might have risen from the dead and played all his pieces in succession without Mme des Laumes paying the slightest attention. 
She belonged to that half of the human race in whom the curiosity the other half feels about the people it does not know is replaced by an interest in the people it does. 
As with many women of the Faubourg Saint-Germain, the presence in a place where she happened to be of someone from her set, though she had nothing in particular to say to him, monopolized her attention at the expense of everything else. 
From that moment on, in the hopes that Swann would notice her, the Princesse, like a tame white mouse to which one offers a bit of sugar and then withdraws it, kept turning her face, which was filled with a thousand signs of complicity unrelated to the feeling in Chopin’s polonaise, in Swann’s direction and if he moved, she would shift in a corresponding direction her magnetic smile.
– Oriane, don’t be angry, resumed Mme de Gallardon, who could never stop herself from sacrificing her greatest social ambitions and highest hopes of some day dazzling the world to the immediate, obscure and private pleasure of saying something disagreeable, but people do claim that M. Swann is someone whom one can’t have in one’s house; is that true?
– Why… you ought to know it’s true, answered the Princesse des Laumes, since you’ve invited him fifty times and he hasn’t come once.
And leaving her mortified cousin, she burst into laughter again, scandalizing the people who were listening to the music, but attracting the attention of Mme de Saint-Euverte, who had stayed near the piano out of politeness and only now noticed the Princesse. 
Mme de Saint-Euverte was especially delighted to see Mme des Laumes because she had thought she was still at Guermantes looking after her sick father-in-law.
– Yes, I tucked myself away in a little corner, and I’ve been hearing such lovely things.
– Why yes, a very long time which seemed very short to me – it was long only because I couldn’t see you.
Mme de Saint-Euverte tried to give her chair to the Princesse, who answered:
– Oh, please, no! 
Why should you? 
I’m comfortable wherever I sit!
’
And, intentionally selecting, the better to display her simplicity, great lady though she was, a low seat without a back:
– Here, this hassock is all I need. 
It’ll make me sit up straight. 
Oh, my Lord, I’m making too much noise again, if I’m not careful they’ll turn on me and throw me out.
Meanwhile, the pianist having redoubled his speed, the musical emotion was at its height, a servant was passing refreshments on a tray and making the spoons clink and, as happened every week, Mme de Saint-Euverte signalled to him, without his seeing her, to go away. 
A newly-wed, who had been taught that a young woman must not appear bored, smiled with pleasure, and tried to catch the hostess’s eye in order to send her a look her gratitude for having ‘thought of her’ for such a treat. 
However, although she remained calmer than Mme de Franquetot, it was not without some uneasiness that she followed the music; but the object of her uneasiness was, not the pianist, but the piano, on which a candle jumping with each fortissimo risked, if not setting its shade on fire, at least spotting the Brazilian rosewood. 
In the end she could not bear it any longer and, scaling the two steps of the dais on which the piano was placed, swooped down to remove the sconce. 
But her hands were just about to touch it when, with a final chord, the piece ended and the pianist stood up. 
Nevertheless the young woman’s bold initiative, the resulting brief promiscuity between her and the instrumentalist, produced a generally favourable impression.
– Did you see what that young woman did, Princesse? 
said Général de Froberville to the Princesse des Laumes, whom he had come up to greet and whom Mme de Saint-Euverte had left for a moment. 
Odd, wasn’t it? 
Is she a performer?
– No, she’s just some young Mme de Cambremer, answered the Princesse without thinking and then added hurriedly: I’m only repeating what I heard, I haven’t the slightest idea who she is; someone behind me was saying they were country neighbours of Mme de Saint-Euverte, but I don’t think anyone knows them, really. 
They must be ‘country folk’! 
Anyway, I don’t know if you’re intimate with the brilliant society here, but I can’t put a name to any of these astonishing people. 
What do you think they spend their time doing when they’re not at Mme de Saint-Euverte’s evenings? 
She must have ordered them along with the musicians, the chairs and the refreshments. 
You must admit these ‘guests from Belloir’s’98 are magnificent. 
Does she really have the heart to rent the same ‘extras’ every week? 
It isn’t possible!
– Ah! 
But Cambremer is quite a good name, and an old one too, said the Général.
– I see no harm in the fact that it’s old, answered the Princesse drily, but still, it’s not euphonious, she added, isolating the word euphonious as though between quotation marks, a little affectation in delivery that was peculiar to the Guermantes set.
– You think so? 
She’s pretty enough to eat, though, said the Général, who had not let Mme de Cambremer out of his sight. 
Don’t you agree, Princesse?
– She thrusts herself forward too much, I think; in so young a woman, that’s not nice – because I don’t believe she’s of my generation, answered Mme des Laumes (this expression being common to both the Gallardons and the Guermantes).
– It was the name of a victory before it was a bridge, Princesse, said the Général. 
What do you expect – an old trooper like me, he went on, removing his monocle and wiping it, as he would have changed a bandage, while the Princesse instinctively looked away. 
That Empire nobility, it’s different of course, but really, for what it is, it’s very fine of its kind. 
They were people who, when all is said and done, fought like heroes.
– Well, naturally, Princesse; it was their grandparents’ furniture.
– Well, I’m not saying it wasn’t, but it’s no less ugly for all that. 
I understand perfectly well that one can’t always have pretty things, but at least one’s things should not be ridiculous. 
What do you expect? 
I can’t think of anything more conventional, more bourgeois, than that horrible style – cabinets with swans’ heads like bathtubs.
– Actually I do believe they have some beautiful things, they must have that famous mosaic table that was used for the signing of the Treaty of…
And she coquettishly enhanced the smile which this supposition had brought to her lips by giving her blue eyes, which were fixed on the General, a dreamy, gentle expression.
– Ah, Princesse, you know very well they wouldn’t be able to contain themselves for joy…
– Ah, Princesse, you’re not a Guermantes for nothing. 
You have your share of it all right, the wit of the Guermantes family!
– They always say ‘the wit of the Guermantes family’. 
I’ve never been able to understand why. 
Do you know other Guermantes who have it? 
she added in a bubbly, joyful burst of laughter, her features concentrated, interconnected in a network of animation, her eyes sparkling, blazing with a radiant sunshine of gaiety that could be kindled only by remarks, even if made by the Princesse herself, in praise of her wit or her beauty. 
Wait, there’s Swann. 
He seems to be speaking to your young Cambremer. 
There… he’s next to old mother Saint-Euverte, don’t you see him? 
Ask him to introduce you. 
But hurry up, he’s trying to walk away!
– How frightfully ill he’s looking – did you notice? 
said the General.
– My dear Charles! 
Ah! 
At last he’s coming, I was beginning to think he didn’t want to see me!
Swann liked the Princesse des Laumes very much, and also the sight of her reminded him of Guermantes, the estate next to Combray, the whole countryside which he loved so much and had ceased to visit so as not to be away from Odette. 
Using the half-artistic, half-courtly formulae which he knew were pleasing to the Princesse and which he resumed quite naturally as soon as he reimmersed himself for a moment in his old social milieu – and wanting anyway for his own sake to express the yearning he felt for the country:
– Ah, he said to some vague general audience, in order to be heard both by Mme de Saint-Euverte, to whom he was speaking, and by Mme des Laumes, for whom he was speaking, here’s the charming Princesse! 
See, she has come up from Guermantes expressly to hear Liszt’s Saint Francis of Assisi and has only just had time, like a pretty titmouse, to go and pluck a little fruit from the wild plums and hawthorns and put them on her head; there is even a bit of dew on them still, a bit of the hoarfrost that must be making the duchess groan so. 
It’s very pretty indeed, my dear Princesse.
– What, the Princesse has come up expressly from Guermantes? 
But that’s too much! 
I didn’t know, I’m embarrassed, exclaimed Mme de Saint-Euverte naïvely, not being used to Swann’s wit. 
Then, looking more closely at the Princesse’s headgear: Why you’re quite right, it’s meant to look like… what shall I say, not chestnuts, no – oh what a ravishing idea! 
But how could the Princesse have known what was going to be on my programme! 
The musicians didn’t even tell me.
Swann, who was accustomed, when he was in the company of a woman whom he had kept up the habit of addressing in gallant language, to say things so delicately nuanced that many society people could not understand them, did not condescend to explain to Mme de Saint-Euverte that he had merely been speaking metaphorically. 
As for the Princesse, she began laughing heartily, because Swann’s wit was highly appreciated in her set and also because she could not hear a compliment addressed to her without finding it most exquisitely subtle and irresistibly droll.
– Well! 
I’m delighted, Charles, if you like my little hawthorn fruits. 
Why did you speak to that Cambremer woman? 
Are you her neighbour in the country too?
Mme de Saint-Euverte, seeing that the Princesse appeared happy to chat with Swann, had moved off.
– I! 
But then those people have country places everywhere! 
How I would like to be in their place!
– It’s not the Cambremers, it’s her own family; she’s a Legrandin daughter and used to come to Combray. 
I don’t know if you know you’re the Comtesse de Combray and the chapter owes you a due?
– I don’t know what the chapter owes me, but I know that I’m dunned a hundred francs every year by the curé, which I could do without. 
Really these Cambremers have a most astonishing name.100 
It ends just in time, but it ends badly! she said, laughing.
– Someone very angry and very proper didn’t dare finish the first word.
– But since he couldn’t stop himself from beginning the second, he should have finished the first – then he’d be done with it once and for all. 
Our jokes are in charming taste, my little Charles, but how tiresome it is not to see you any more, she added in a caressing tone, I so much like talking to you. 
Just think, I wouldn’t even have been able to make that idiot Froberville understand that the name Cambremer is astonishing. 
Admit that life is a dreadful thing. 
It’s only when I see you that I stop feeling bored.
This was probably not true. 
But Swann and the Princesse had the same way of looking at the small things of life, the effect of which – unless it was the cause – was a great similarity in their ways of expressing themselves and even in their pronunciation. 
No one noticed the resemblance because their two voices were so utterly unlike. 
But if in one’s imagination one managed to divest Swann’s remarks of the sonority in which they were enveloped, of the moustache from under which they issued, one realized that these were the same sentences, the same inflections, that these turns of phrase belonged to the Guermantes set. 
When it came to the important things, Swann and the Princesse did not have the same ideas about anything. 
But now that Swann had become so sad, always in the sort of tremulous condition that precedes the moment one is going to cry, he felt as compelled to talk about grief as a murderer is to talk about his crime. 
When he heard the Princesse say that life was a dreadful thing, he felt as comforted as if she had been talking about Odette.
– Oh, yes! 
Life is a dreadful thing. 
We must see each other soon, my dear friend. 
What’s so nice about being with you is that you’re not cheerful. 
We could spend an evening together.
– What a good idea! 
Why don’t you come down to Guermantes? 
My mother-in-law would be wild with joy. 
It’s supposed to be so ugly thereabouts, but I must say I don’t dislike that countryside at all; I have a horror of ‘picturesque’ spots.
– I agree, it’s wonderful, answered Swann, it’s almost too beautiful, too alive for me just now; it’s a place to be happy in. 
Perhaps it’s because I’ve lived there, but the things there speak to me so! 
As soon as a breath of wind comes up, when the wheat begins to move, it seems to me that someone is about to arrive, I’m going to hear some news; and those little houses by the edge of the water… I would be quite miserable!
– Oh, my dear Charles, watch out, there’s that dreadful Rampillon woman. 
She’s seen me; please hide me. 
Remind me what it was that happened to her; I’m getting it all mixed up; she’s just married off her daughter, or her lover, I can’t remember which; maybe both of them… and to each other!
… Oh no! 
I remember now, she’s been dropped by her prince… Pretend to be talking to me, so that Bérénice woman won’t come over and invite me to dinner. 
Anyway, I must fly. 
Listen, my dear Charles, now that I’ve seen you for once, won’t you let me steal you away and take you to the Princesse’s? 
She’d be so pleased to see you, and Basin, too – he’s meeting me there. 
If we didn’t get news of you from Mémé… Just think, I never see you at all now!
Swann declined; having told M. de Charlus that when he left Mme de Saint-Euverte’s he would go directly back home, he did not want to run the risk, by going on to the Princess of Parma’s, of missing a note that he had been hoping all evening would be handed to him by a servant during the party, and that perhaps he would find in his concierge’s keeping. 
‘Poor Swann, said Mme des Laumes that night to her husband, he’s always kind, but he appears quite unhappy. You’ll see, because he has promised to come to dinner one of these days. I do find it absurd that a man of his intelligence should suffer over a person of that sort, who isn’t even interesting – because they say she’s an idiot,’ she added with the wisdom of people not in love who believe a man of sense should be unhappy only over a person who is worth it; which is rather like being surprised that anyone should condescend to suffer from cholera because of so small a creature as the comma bacillus.
Swann wanted to leave, but just when he was at last about to escape, Général de Froberville asked him for an introduction to Mme de Cambremer and he was obliged to go back into the drawing-room with him to look for her.
– Now, Swann, I’d rather be the husband of that woman than slaughtered by savages, what do you say?
The words ‘slaughtered by savages’ pierced Swann’s heart painfully; and at once he felt the need to continue the conversation:
– Well, you know, he said to him, some really fine lives that have ended that way… For instance, if you remember… That navigator whose ashes were brought back by Dumont d’Urville, La Pérouse… (And Swann was immediately happy, as if he had spoken Odette’s name.) He was a fine character, La Pérouse was, and one who interests me very much, he added with a melancholy air.
– Oh, yes, of course. 
La Pérouse, said the Général. 
It’s a well-known name. 
There’s even a street by that name.
– You know someone in the rue La Pérouse? 
asked Swann in some agitation.
– I know only Mme de Chanlivault, the sister of that good fellow Chaussepierre. 
She gave us a nice theatre-party the other day. 
Her salon will be very elegant one of these days, you’ll see!
– Ah, so she lives in the rue La Pérouse. 
It’s an appealing street, very pretty, and so melancholy.
– Why, not at all, that’s because you haven’t been there for some time; it’s not melancholy now, they’re beginning to build there, they’re building in the whole neighbourhood.
When at last Swann introduced M. de Froberville to young Mme de Cambremer, since it was the first time she had heard the Général’s name she ventured the smile of joy and surprise she would have given him if no other name but that one had ever been uttered in her presence, for as she did not know the friends of her new family, each time a person was presented to her, she believed he was one of them, and thinking it would be tactful of her to look as though she had heard such a lot about him since she was married, she would put out her hand with a hesitant air meant as a proof of the inculcated reserve she had to conquer and the spontaneous congeniality that succeeded in overcoming it. 
And so her parents-in-law, whom she still believed to be the most brilliant people in France, declared that she was an angel; especially since they preferred to appear, in marrying their son to her, to have responded to the attraction of her fine qualities rather than of her great wealth.
– One can see that you have the soul of a musician, Madame, the Général said to her, unconsciously alluding to the incident of the sconce.
But the concert was beginning again and Swann realized he would not be able to leave before the end of this new number. 
He was suffering at having to remain shut up among these people whose stupidity and absurd habits struck him all the more painfully since being unaware of his love, incapable, had they known about it, of taking any interest in it or of doing more than smile at it as at some childish nonsense or deplore it as utter madness, they made it appear to him as a subjective state which existed only for him, whose reality was confirmed for him by nothing outside himself; he suffered most of all, to the point where even the sound of the instruments made him want to cry out, from prolonging his exile in this place to which Odette would never come, where no one, where nothing knew her, from which she was entirely absent.
But suddenly it was as though she had appeared in the room, and this apparition caused him such harrowing pain that he had to put his hand on his heart. 
What had happened was that the violin had risen to a series of high notes on which it lingered as though waiting for something, holding on to them in a prolonged expectancy, in the exaltation of already seeing the object of its expectation approaching, and with a desperate effort to try to endure until it arrived, to welcome it before expiring, to keep the way open for it another moment with a last bit of strength so that it could come through, as one holds up a trap-door that would otherwise fall back. 
And before Swann had time to understand, and say to himself: ‘It’s the little phrase from the sonata by Vinteuil; don’t listen!’ all his memories of the time when Odette was in love with him, which he had managed until now to keep out of sight in the deepest part of himself, deceived by this sudden beam of light from the time of love which they believed had returned, had awoken and flown swiftly back up to sing madly to him, with no pity for his present misfortune, the forgotten refrains of happiness.
In place of the abstract expressions ‘the time when I was happy’, ‘the time when I was loved’, which he had often used before now without suffering too much, for his mind had enclosed within them only spurious extracts of the past that preserved nothing of it, he now recovered everything which had fixed for ever the specific, volatile essence of that lost happiness; he saw everything again, the snowy curled petals of the chrysanthemum that she had tossed to him in his carriage, that he had held against his lips – the embossed address of the ‘Maison Dorée’ on the letter in which he had read: ‘My hand is shaking so hard as I write to you’ – the way her eyebrows had come together when she said to him with a supplicating look: ‘It won’t be too long before you send word to me?’; he smelled the fragrance of the hairdresser’s iron by which he would have his ‘brush-cut’ straightened while Lorédan went to fetch the young working-girl, the stormy rains that fell so often that spring, the icy drive home in his victoria, by moonlight, all the meshes formed from habits of thinking, impressions of the seasons, reactions on the surface of his skin, which had laid over a succession of weeks a uniform net in which his body was now recaptured. 
At that time, he was satisfying a sensual curiosity by experiencing the pleasures of people who live for love. 
He had believed he could stop there, that he would not be obliged to learn their sorrows; how small a thing Odette’s charm was for him now compared with the astounding terror that extended out from it like a murky halo, the immense anguish of not knowing at every moment what she had been doing, of not possessing her everywhere and always! 
Alas, he recalled the accents in which she had exclaimed: ‘But I will always be able to see you, I am always free!’ – she who was never free now! 
– the interest, the curiosity she had shown in his own life, the passionate desire that he should do her the favour – which he in fact dreaded in those days as a cause of tiresome inconveniences – of allowing her to enter it; how she had been obliged to beg him to let her take him to the Verdurins’; and when he had allowed her to come to him once a month, how she had had to tell him over and over again, before he would let himself give in to her, how delightful it would be to have the habit of seeing each other every day, a habit which she dreamed of whereas to him it seemed only a tedious bother, which she had then grown tired of and broken once and for all, while for him it had become such an irresistible and painful need. 
He did not know how truthfully he was speaking when, the third time he saw her, as she said to him yet again: ‘But why don’t you let me come more often?’, he had said to her with a laugh, gallantly: ‘for fear of being hurt’. 
Now, alas, she still wrote to him occasionally from a restaurant or hotel on paper that bore its printed name; but now the letters of that name burned him like letters of fire. 
‘It’s written from the Hôtel Vouillemont?101 What can she have gone there to do? And with whom? What has been going on there?’ He remembered the gas-jets being extinguished along the boulevard des Italiens when he had met her against all hope among the wandering shadows on that night which had seemed to him almost supernatural and which indeed – since it belonged to a time when he did not even have to ask himself if he would vex her by looking for her, by finding her, so sure was he that her greatest joy was to see him and go home with him – was truly part of a mysterious world to which one can never return once its doors have closed. 
And Swann saw, motionless before that relived happiness, a miserable figure who filled him with pity because he did not recognize him right away, and he had to lower his eyes so that no one would see they were full of tears. 
It was himself.
When he realized this, his pity vanished, but he was jealous of the other self she had loved, he was jealous of those of whom he had often said to himself without suffering too much ‘maybe she loves them’, now that he had exchanged the vague idea of loving, in which there is no love, for the petals of the chrysanthemum and the letterhead of the Maison d’Or, which were full of it. 
Then his pain became too sharp, he passed his hand over his forehead, let his monocle drop, wiped its glass. 
And no doubt, if he had seen himself at that moment, he would have added to the collection of those which he had singled out for distinction the monocle he was removing like an importunate thought and from whose clouded face, with a handkerchief, he was trying to wipe off his worries.
There are tones in a violin – if we cannot see the instrument and therefore cannot relate what we hear to our image of it, which changes the sound of it – so similar to those of certain contralto voices that we have the illusion a singer has been added to the concert. 
We lift our eyes, we see only the bodies of the instruments, as precious as Chinese boxes, but at times we are still fooled by the deceptive call of the siren; at times too we think we hear a captive genie struggling deep inside the intelligent, bewitched and tremulous box, like a devil in a holy-water basin; at times, lastly, it is like a pure and supernatural being that passes through the air uncoiling its invisible message.
As if the instrumentalists were not so much playing the little phrase as performing the rituals it required in order to make its appearance, and proceeding to the incantations necessary for obtaining and prolonging a few moments the wonder of its evocation, Swann, who could no more see it than if it had belonged to an ultra-violet world, and who was experiencing something like the refreshing sense of a metamorphosis in the momentary blindness with which he was struck as he approached it, felt it to be present, like a protective goddess, a confidante of his love, who in order to be able to come to him in the midst of the crowd and take him aside to talk to him, had assumed the disguise of this body of sound. 
And while it passed, light, soothing, murmured like a perfume, telling him what it had to tell him, as he scrutinized every word, sorry to see them fly off so quickly, he involuntarily made the motion with his lips of kissing the harmonious fleeting body as it passed. 
He no longer felt exiled and alone since the little phrase was addressing him, was talking to him in a low voice about Odette. 
For he no longer felt, as he once had, that the little phrase did not know him and Odette. 
It had so often witnessed their moments of happiness! 
True, it had just as often warned him how fragile they were. 
And in fact, whereas in those days he read suffering in its smile, in its limpid and disenchanted intonation, he now found in it instead the grace of a resignation that was almost gay. 
Of those sorrows of which it used to speak to him and which, without being affected by them, he had seen it carry along with it, smiling, in its rapid and sinuous course, of those sorrows which had now become his own, without his having any hope of ever being free of them, it seemed to say to him as it had once said of his happiness: ‘What does it matter? It means nothing.’ And for the first time Swann’s thoughts turned with a stab of pity and tenderness to Vinteuil, to that unknown, sublime brother who must also have suffered so; what must his life have been like? 
from the depths of what sorrows had he drawn that godlike strength, that unlimited power to create? 
When it was the little phrase that spoke to him about the vanity of his sufferings, Swann found solace in that very wisdom which, just recently, had seemed to him intolerable when he thought he could read it on the faces of the indifferent people who considered his love an insignificant aberration. 
For the little phrase, unlike them, whatever its opinion of the brief duration of the conditions of the soul, did not see them as these people did, as something less serious than the events of everyday life, but on the contrary, regarded them as so superior that they alone were worth expressing. 
These charms of an intimate sadness – these were what it sought to imitate, to recreate, and their very essence, even though it is to be incommunicable and to seem frivolous to everyone but the one who is experiencing them, had been captured by the little phrase and made visible. 
So much so that it caused their value to be acknowledged, and their divine sweetness savoured, by all those same people sitting in the audience – if they were at all musical – who would afterwards fail to recognize these charms in real life, in every individual love that came into being before their eyes. 
Doubtless the form in which it had codified them could not be resolved into reasoned arguments. 
But ever since, more than a year ago now, the love of music had, for a time at least, been born in him, revealing to him many of the riches of his own soul, Swann had regarded musical motifs as actual ideas, of another world, of another order, ideas veiled in shadows, unknown, impenetrable to the intelligence, but not for all that less perfectly distinct from one another, unequal among themselves in value and significance. 
When, after the Verdurin evening, he had had the little phrase played over for him, and had sought to disentangle how it was that, like a perfume, like a caress, it encircled him, enveloped him, he had realized that it was to the closeness of the intervals between the five notes that composed it, and to the constant repetition of two of them, that was due this impression of a frigid and withdrawn sweetness; but in reality he knew that he was reasoning this way not about the phrase itself but about simple values substituted, for his mind’s convenience, for the mysterious entity he had perceived, before knowing the Verdurins, at that party where he had first heard the sonata played. 
He knew that even the memory of the piano falsified still further the perspective in which he saw the elements of the music, that the field open to the musician is not a miserable keyboard of seven notes, but an immeasurable keyboard still almost entirely unknown on which, here and there only, separated by shadows thick and unexplored, a few of the millions of keys of tenderness, of passion, of courage, of serenity which compose it, each as different from the others as one universe from another universe, have been found by a few great artists who do us the service, by awakening in us something corresponding to the theme they have discovered, of showing us what richness, what variety, is hidden unbeknownst to us within that great unpenetrated and disheartening darkness of our soul which we take for emptiness and nothingness. 
Vinteuil had been one of those musicians. 
In his little phrase, although it might present an obscure surface to one’s intelligence, one sensed a content so solid, so explicit, to which it gave a force so new, so original, that those who had heard it preserved it within themselves on the same footing as the ideas of the intellect. 
Swann referred back to it as to a conception of love and happiness whose distinctive character he recognized at once, as he would that of La Princesse de Clèves or of René,102 when their titles returned to his memory. 
Even when he was not thinking of the little phrase, it existed latent in his mind in the same way as did certain other notions without equivalents, like the notion of light, of sound, of perspective, of physical pleasure, which are the rich possessions that diversify and ornament the realms of our inner life. 
Perhaps we will lose them, perhaps they will fade away, if we return to nothingness. 
But as long as we are alive, we can no more eliminate our experience of them than we can our experience of some real object, than we can for example doubt the light of the lamp illuminating the metamorphosed objects in our room whence even the memory of darkness has vanished. 
In this way Vinteuil’s phrase had, like some theme from Tristan,103 for example, which may also represent to us a certain emotional accretion, espoused our mortal condition, taken on something human that was rather touching. 
Its destiny was linked to the future, to the reality of our soul, of which it was one of the most distinctive, the best differentiated ornaments. 
Maybe it is the nothingness that is real and our entire dream is non-existent, but in that case we feel that these phrases of music, and these notions that exist in relation to our dream, must be nothing also. 
We will perish, but we have for hostages these divine captives who will follow us and share our fate. 
And death in their company is less bitter, less inglorious, perhaps less probable.
Swann was, therefore, not wrong to believe that the phrase of the sonata really existed. 
Of course, although human from this point of view, it belonged to an order of supernatural creatures whom we have never seen, but whom despite this we recognize with delight when some explorer of the invisible manages to capture one, to bring it, from that divine world to which he has access, to shine for a few moments above ours. 
This was what Vinteuil had done for the little phrase. 
Swann sensed that the composer had merely unveiled it, made it visible, with his musical instruments, following and respecting its sketched form with a hand so tender, so prudent, so delicate and so sure that the sound altered at every moment, fading away to indicate a shadow, revivified when it had to follow a bolder contour. 
And one proof that Swann was not mistaken when he believed in the real existence of that phrase was that any lover of music with the least discernment would at once have noticed the imposture if Vinteuil, having had less capacity to see and to render its forms, had sought to conceal, by adding lines of his own invention here and there, the lacunae in his vision or the failures of his hand.
It had disappeared. 
Swann knew that it would reappear at the end of the last movement, after a whole long passage that Mme Verdurin’s pianist always skipped. 
There were marvellous ideas in it which Swann had not distinguished at the first hearing and that he perceived now, as if they had divested themselves, in the cloakroom of his memory, of the uniform disguise of novelty. 
Swann listened to all the scattered themes which would enter into the composition of the phrase, like premises in the necessary conclusion; he was attending its birth. 
‘O audacity as inspired, perhaps, he said to himself, as that of a Lavoisier, of an Ampèr104 – the audacity of a Vinteuil experimenting, discovering the secret laws that govern an unknown force, guiding and urging on, across a region unexplored, towards the only possible goal, the invisible team in which he has placed his trust and which he will never see!’ The beautiful dialogue which Swann heard between the piano and the violin at the beginning of the last passage! 
The suppression of human speech, far from letting fantasy reign there, as one might have believed, had eliminated it; never had spoken language been such an inflexible necessity, never had it known such pertinent questions, such irrefutable answers. 
First the solitary piano lamented, like a bird abandoned by its mate; the violin heard it, answered it as from a neighbouring tree. 
It was as at the beginning of the world, as if there were only the two of them still on the earth, or rather in this world closed to all the rest, constructed by the logic of a creator, this world in which there would never be more than the two of them: this sonata. 
Was it a bird, was it the soul of the little phrase, not yet fully formed, was it a fairy – this creature invisibly lamenting, whose plaint the piano afterwards tenderly repeated? 
Its cries were so sudden that the violinist had to leap to his bow to collect them. 
Marvellous bird! 
– the violinist seemed to want to charm it, tame it, capture it. 
Already it had passed into his soul, already the violinist’s body, truly possessed, was shaking like a medium’s with the summoned presence of the little phrase. 
Swann knew it was going to speak one more time. 
And he had so completely divided himself in two that the wait for the imminent moment when he would find himself confronting it again made him shudder with the kind of sob which a beautiful line of verse or a sad piece of news wring from us, not when we are alone, but if we repeat them to friends in whom we can see ourselves as another person whose probable emotion moves them. 
It reappeared, but this time to hang in the air and play for a moment only, as though motionless, and afterwards expire. 
And so Swann lost nothing of this very brief extension of its life. 
It was still there like an iridescent bubble floating by itself. 
Like a rainbow, whose brilliance weakens, fades, then rises again, and before dying away altogether, flares up a moment more brilliant than ever: to the two colours it had so far allowed to appear, it added others, variegated chords of every hue in the prism, and made them sing. 
Swann did not dare move and would have made all the other people be still too, as if the slightest motion might compromise the fragile, exquisite and supernatural magic that was so close to vanishing. 
No one, in fact, dreamed of speaking. 
The ineffable word of one man who was absent, perhaps dead (Swann did not know if Vinteuil was still alive), breathing out above the rites of these officiants, was enough to hold the attention of three hundred people, and made of this dais, where a soul had thus been summoned, one of the noblest altars on which a supernatural ceremony could be performed. 
So that, when the phrase came unravelled at last, floating in shreds in the motifs which followed and had already taken its place, if at first Swann was irritated to see the Comtesse de Monteriender, famous for her naïve remarks, lean towards him to confide her impressions even before the sonata had ended, he could not keep from smiling, and perhaps also found a deeper meaning that she did not see in the words she used. 
Awestruck by the virtuosity of the performers, the Comtesse exclaimed to Swann: ‘It’s amazing, I’ve never seen anything so powerful…’ But a scruple for accuracy causing her to correct her first assertion, she added this reservation: ‘anything so powerful… since the table-turning!’
From this evening on, Swann realized that the feeling Odette had had for him would never return, that his hopes of happiness would never be realized now. 
And on the days when she happened to be kind and affectionate with him again, if she showed him some thoughtful attention, he would note these ostensible and deceptive signs of a slight renewal of feeling, with the loving, sceptical solicitude, the despairing joy of those who, caring for a friend in the last days of an incurable illness, report certain precious facts such as: ‘Yesterday, he did his accounts himself, and he was the one who spotted a mistake in addition that we had made; he ate an egg and enjoyed it – if he digests it without any trouble we’ll try a cutlet tomorrow,’ although they know these facts are meaningless on the eve of an unavoidable death. 
No doubt Swann was sure that if he had now been living far away from Odette, she would in the end have become unimportant to him, so that he would have been glad if she had left Paris for ever; he would have had the courage to remain; but he did not have the courage to leave.
He had often thought of it. 
Now that he had gone back to work on his study of Vermeer, he needed to return at least for a few days to The Hague, Dresden, Brunswick. 
He was convinced that a ‘Diana with Her Companions’ which had been bought by the Mauritshuis at the Goldschmidt sale as a Nicolas Maes, was in reality a Vermeer.105 
And he wished he could study the painting on the spot, in order to support his conviction. 
But to leave Paris while Odette was there, or even when she was absent – for in new places where our sensations are not dulled by habit, we retemper, we revive an old pain – was for him so cruel a plan that he was able to think about it constantly only because he knew he was resolved never to execute it. 
But sometimes, while he was asleep, the intention of taking the trip would revive in him – without his remembering that it was impossible – and in his sleep he would take the trip. 
One day he dreamed he was leaving for a year; leaning out at the door of the railway car towards a young man on the platform who was saying good-bye to him, weeping, Swann tried to convince him to leave with him. 
The train began to move, his anxiety woke him, he remembered that he was not leaving, that he would see Odette that evening, the next day and almost every day after. 
Then, still shaken by his dream, he blessed the particular circumstances that had made him independent, because of which he could remain near Odette, and also succeed in getting her to allow him to see her now and then; and, recapitulating all these advantages – his position; his fortune, from which she was too often in need of assistance not to shrink from contemplating a definite break with him (having even, people said, an ulterior plan of getting him to marry her); his friendship with M. de Charlus, which in truth had never helped him obtain much from Odette, but gave him the comfort of feeling that she heard flattering things about him from this mutual friend for whom she had such great esteem; and lastly even his intelligence, which he employed entirely in contriving a new intrigue every day that would make his presence, if not agreeable, at least necessary to Odette – he thought about what would have become of him if he had not had all this, he thought that if, like so many other men, he had been poor, humble, wretched, obliged to accept any sort of work, or tied to relatives, to a wife, he might have been obliged to leave Odette, that that dream, the terror of which was still so close to him, might have been true, and he said to himself: ‘You don’t know it when you’re happy. You’re never as unhappy as you think.’106 But he calculated that this life had already gone on for several years, that all he could hope for now was that it would go on for ever, that he would sacrifice his work, his pleasures, his friends, finally his whole life to the daily expectation of a meeting that could bring him no happiness, and he wondered if he was not deceiving himself, if the circumstances that had favoured his love affair and kept it from ending had not been bad for the course of his life, if the desirable outcome would not in fact have been the one which, to his delight, had taken place only in a dream: for him to have gone away; he told himself that you don’t know it when you’re unhappy, that you are never as happy as you think.
Sometimes he hoped she would die in an accident without suffering, she who was outside, in the streets, on the roads, from morning to night. 
And when she returned safe and sound, he marvelled that the human body was so supple and so strong, that it continued to ward off, to outwit all the perils which surrounded it (and which Swann found innumerable now that his secret desire had computed them) and so allowed people to abandon themselves daily and almost with impunity to their work of mendacity, their pursuit of pleasure. 
And Swann felt very close in his heart to Mohammed II, whose portrait by Bellini he liked so much, who, realizing that he had fallen madly in love with one of his wives, stabbed her in order, as his Venetian biographer ingenuously says, to recover his independence of mind. 
Then he would be filled with indignation that he should be thinking thus only of himself, and the sufferings he had endured would seem to him to deserve no pity since he himself had placed so low a value on Odette’s life.
Unable to separate from her irrevocably, if he had at least been able to see her without any separations, his pain would in the end have abated and perhaps his love would have died. 
And if she did not want to leave Paris for ever, he would have liked her never to leave Paris. 
At least since he knew that her only long absence was the yearly one in August and September, he had ample opportunity several months in advance to dissolve the bitter idea of it in all the Time to come which he carried within him in anticipation and which, composed of days identical with those of the present, flowed through his mind transparent and cold, sustaining his sadness, but without causing him too sharp a pain. 
But that interior future, that colourless free-flowing river, was suddenly assaulted by a single remark of Odette’s which entered Swann and, like a piece of ice, immobilized it, hardened its fluidity, made it freeze entirely; and Swann suddenly felt he was filled with an enormous infrangible mass that pressed on the inner walls of his being till it nearly burst: what Odette had said, observing him with a sly smiling glance, was: ‘Forcheville is going to be taking a lovely trip, at Pentecost. He’s going to Egypt,’ and Swann had immediately understood that this meant: ‘I’m going to Egypt at Pentecost with Forcheville.’ And in fact, if several days after, Swann said to her: ‘Look, about this trip you told me you would be taking with Forcheville,’ she would answer thoughtlessly: ‘Yes, my dear boy, we’re leaving the 19th, we’ll send you a view of the Pyramids.’ Then he wanted to know if she was Forcheville’s mistress, he would want to ask her directly. 
He knew that, being as superstitious as she was, there were certain perjuries she would not commit, and, too, the fear, which had restrained him up to this point, of irritating Odette by questioning her, of making her hate him, had vanished now that he had lost all hope of ever being loved by her.
One day, during the longest period of calm he had yet been able to go through without suffering renewed attacks of jealousy, he had agreed to go to the theatre that evening with the Princesse des Laumes. 
Having opened the newspaper, in order to find out what was being played, the sight of the title, Les Filles de Marbre by Théodore Barrière,107 struck him such a painful blow that he recoiled and turned his head away. 
Illuminated as though by footlights, in the new spot where it had appeared, the word ‘marble’, which he had lost the ability to distinguish because he was so used to seeing it before his eyes, had suddenly become visible again and had immediately reminded him of the story Odette had told him once long ago, about a visit she had made to the Salon du Palais de l’Industrie with Mme Verdurin, where the latter had said to her: ‘Watch yourself, now! I know how to melt you. You’re not made of marble, you know.’ Odette had sworn to him it was only a joke, and he had attached no importance to it. 
But he had had more confidence in her at that time than he did now. 
And in fact the anonymous letter mentioned love affairs of that kind. 
Without daring to lift his eyes to the newspaper again, he unfolded it, turned a page in order not to see the words ‘Les Filles de Marbre’, and mechanically began reading news from the provinces. 
There had been a storm on the Channel, damage was reported at Dieppe, Cabourg, Beuzeval. 
Immediately he recoiled again.
The name Beuzeval had reminded him of the name of another place in the same area, Beuzeville, whose name is joined by a hyphen to another, Bréauté, which he had often seen on maps, but without ever noticing before that it was the same as that of his friend M. de Bréauté, whom the anonymous letter mentioned as having been Odette’s lover. 
In fact, in the case of M. de Bréauté, the accusation was not unlikely; but so far as Mme Verdurin was concerned, it was a sheer impossibility. 
From the fact that Odette sometimes lied, one could not conclude that she never told the truth and, in the remarks she had exchanged with Mme Verdurin and which she herself had described to Swann, he had recognized those pointless and dangerous jokes made, from inexperience of life and ignorance of vice, by women whose innocence they merely reveal and who – like Odette for example – are least prone to feel passionate love for another woman. 
Whereas on the contrary, the indignation with which she had denied the suspicions she had involuntarily aroused in him for a moment by her story squared with all he knew about his mistress’s tastes and temperament. 
But at this moment, through one of those inspirations common to jealous men, analogous to that which reveals to a poet or scientist who has still only one rhyme or one observation the idea or law that will give them all their effective power, Swann recalled for the first time a remark Odette had made to him fully two years before: ‘Oh, Mme Verdurin! – all she can think about these days is me. I’m her little pet. She kisses me, and she wants me to go shopping with her, and she wants me to call her tu.’108 Far from seeing, at the time, any sort of connection between this comment and the absurd remarks meant to simulate some sort of depravity which Odette had reported to him, he had welcomed it as proof of a warm friendship. 
Now the memory of Mme Verdurin’s affection had suddenly come to join the memory of her unseemly conversation. 
He could no longer separate them in his mind and saw them mingled in reality too, the affection lending something serious and important to the jokes which in return caused the affection to lose some of its innocence. 
He went to Odette’s house. 
He sat down at a distance from her. 
He did not dare kiss her, not knowing whether it would be affection or anger that a kiss would provoke, either in her, or in himself. 
He said nothing, he watched their love die. 
Suddenly he made up his mind.
– Odette, he said to her, my dear, I know I’m being hateful, but there are a few things I must ask you. 
Do you remember the idea I had about you and Mme Verdurin? 
Tell me, was it true, with her or with anyone else?
She shook her head pursing her lips, a sign people often use to answer that they will not go, that it bores them, if someone asks: ‘Would you like to come watch the cavalcade go past, will you be at the review?’ But a shake of the head thus usually assigned to an event in the future, for this reason colours with some uncertainty the denial of an event that is past. 
What is more it suggests only reasons of personal propriety rather than reprobation, a moral impossibility. 
When he saw Odette make this sign to him that it was untrue, Swann understood that it was perhaps true.
– I’ve already told you. 
You know perfectly well, she added, looking irritated and unhappy.
– Yes, I know, but are you sure? 
Don’t say, ‘You know perfectly well’; say, ‘I have never done anything of that sort with any woman.’
She repeated, as though it were a lesson, ironically, and as if she wanted to get rid of him:
– I have never done anything of that sort with any woman.
– Can you swear it on your medal of Our Lady of Laghet?
Swann knew Odette would never swear a false oath on that medal.
– Oh, you make me so unhappy! she exclaimed, abruptly dodging the grasp of his question. 
Aren’t you done yet? 
What’s the matter with you today? 
Are you determined to make me hate you, to make me detest you? 
You see? 
– I wanted to have a nice time with you again, the way we used to, and this is how you thank me!
However, not letting her go, like a surgeon waiting for a spasm to subside that has interrupted his operation but will not make him abandon it:
– But I have no idea, she exclaimed angrily, maybe a very long time ago, without realizing what I was doing, maybe two or three times.
Swann had envisaged all the possibilities. 
Reality is therefore something that has no relation to possibilities, any more than the stab of a knife in our body has any relation to the gradual motions of the clouds over our head, since those words ‘two or three times’ carved a kind of cross in the tissue of his heart. 
Strange that the words ‘two or three times’, no more than words, words spoken into the air, at a distance, can lacerate the heart this way as if they had really touched it, can make you as sick as if you had swallowed poison. 
Involuntarily Swann thought of the remark he had heard at Mme de Saint-Euverte’s: ‘That’s the most powerful thing I’ve seen since the table-turning.’ This pain he was experiencing was like nothing he had believed. 
Not only because in the hours when he most entirely distrusted her he had rarely imagined such an extremity of evil, but because, even when he did imagine this thing, it remained vague, uncertain, not clothed in the particular horror that had escaped with the words ‘maybe two or three times’, not armed with that specific cruelty as different from everything he had known as a disease with which one is stricken for the first time. 
And yet Odette, from whom all this harm came to him, was no less dear to him, quite the contrary, more precious, as if at the same rate that his suffering increased, the value of the sedative increased, of the antidote which only this woman possessed. 
He wanted to devote more care to her, as to a disease which one suddenly discovers is more serious. 
He wanted the frightful thing she had told him she had done ‘two or three times’ not to be repeated. 
For this, he had to watch over Odette. 
People often say that when we inform a friend of his mistress’s wrongdoings, we succeed only in attaching him to her more closely because he places no faith in them, but how much more so if he does place faith in them! 
But, said Swann to himself, how could he manage to protect her? 
He could perhaps keep her safe from a particular woman, but there were hundreds of others, and he realized what madness had come over him when he had begun, on the evening when he had not found Odette at the Verdurins’, to want something that was always impossible – to possess another person. 
Happily for Swann, underneath the new sufferings that had just entered his soul like hordes of invaders, there lay a natural foundation, older, gentler and silently industrious, like the cells of an injured organ that immediately set about preparing to mend the damaged tissues, like the muscles of a paralysed limb that try to resume their former movements. 
For a time, these older, more autochthonous inhabitants of his soul employed all Swann’s strength in this dim restorative work that gives one an illusion of repose while convalescing, after an operation. 
This time it was not so much, as it usually was, in Swann’s brain that this slackening due to exhaustion took effect, it was rather in his heart. 
But all the things in life that have once existed tend to recur, and like a dying animal shaken one last time by the throes of a convulsion which seemed to have ended, on Swann’s heart, spared for a moment, the same suffering returned of its own volition to cut the same cross again. 
He remembered those moonlit evenings when, lying back in the victoria that was taking him to the rue La Pérouse, he would voluptuously cultivate within himself the emotions of a man in love, without knowing the poisoned fruit they would necessarily bear. 
But all these thoughts did not last more than the space of a second, the time he took to bring his hand to his heart, catch his breath and manage a smile to hide his agony. 
Already he was beginning to ask his questions again. 
For his jealousy, which had taken pains an enemy would not have taken to strike this blow, to introduce him to the most intense suffering he had yet known, did not believe he had suffered enough and sought to expose him to a wound that was deeper still. 
Thus, like a wicked deity, his jealousy inspired Swann and pushed him to his ruin. 
It was not his fault but only Odette’s if at first his torment did not grow worse.
– My dear, he said to her, it’s in the past now. 
Was it with anyone I know?
– No, of course not, I swear it wasn’t. 
And anyway, I think I exaggerated, I don’t think I went that far.
– As you like. 
It doesn’t really matter, but it’s too bad you can’t tell me the name. 
If I could picture the person it would keep me from ever thinking about her again. 
I say this for your own sake, because I wouldn’t be bothering you about it any more. 
It’s such a relief to be able to picture a thing! 
The truly horrifying things are the ones you can’t imagine. 
But you’ve already been so kind, I don’t want to tire you. 
I do thank you with all my heart for all the good you’ve done me. 
I’m quite finished now. 
Only this last question: ‘How long ago was it?’
– Oh, Charles! 
Don’t you see you’re killing me? 
It’s all so long ago. 
I never gave it another thought. 
And now it’s as if you’re positively trying to put those ideas in my head again. 
A lot of good it’ll do you, she said, with unthinking foolishness and deliberate spite.
– Oh, I only wanted to know if it had happened since I’ve known you! 
It would be natural enough. 
Did it happen here? 
Could you tell me which particular evening, so that I could picture what I was doing at the time? 
I’m sure you realize it isn’t possible that you don’t remember who it was with, Odette, my love.
Odette told this almost with a smile, either because it seemed to her quite natural, or because she thought she would thereby make it seem less important, or so as not to appear humiliated. 
At the sight of Swann’s face, she changed her tone:
– You’re a scoundrel, you like tormenting me, making me invent lies which I only tell you so that you’ll leave me in peace.
This second blow which Swann suffered was even more agonizing than the first. 
Never had he supposed the thing had been so recent, hidden from his eyes that had not been able to discover it, not in a past which he had not known, but among evenings which he recalled so clearly, which he had experienced with Odette, which he had believed he knew so well and which now assumed in retrospect an appearance that was two-faced and agonizing; among them suddenly there opened up this wide gap, this moment on the island in the Bois. 
Odette, without being intelligent, had the charm of naturalness. 
She had described, she had mimed this scene with such simplicity that Swann, breathless, saw everything: Odette’s yawn, the little rock. 
He heard her answer – gaily, alas! 
–: ‘I’ve heard that sort of story before!’ He felt she would say nothing more this evening, there was no new revelation to expect just now; he said to her: ‘My poor dear, forgive me, I feel I’m hurting you, it’s over and done with, I’m not thinking about it any more.’
But she saw that his eyes were still dwelling on the things he did not know and on that past of their love, monotonous and sweet in his memory because it was vague, which was now being torn open like a wound by that minute on the island in the Bois, in the moonlight, after the dinner with the Princesse des Laumes. 
But he was so much in the habit by now of finding life interesting – of admiring the curious discoveries one can make – that even while suffering to the point of believing he could not endure such pain for long, he said to himself: ‘Life is really astonishing; it really has great surprises in store for us; immorality is actually more common than one would think. Here’s a woman I trusted, who seemed so simple, so honest in any case, even if she was rather flighty, who seemed quite normal and healthy in her tastes; after an unlikely denunciation I question her, and the little she admits reveals much more than what one would have suspected.’ But he could not confine himself to these disinterested remarks. 
He tried to estimate the exact value of what she had told him, in order to know if he ought to conclude that she had done these things often, that they would happen again. 
He repeated to himself the words she had said: ‘I knew quite well what she was after’, ‘Two or three times’, ‘I’ve heard that sort of story before!’, but they did not reappear in Swann’s memory disarmed, each of them held a knife and with it struck him another blow. 
For a very long time, just as an invalid cannot stop himself from trying over and over again to make the motion that is painful to him, he repeated these words to himself: ‘I’m quite comfortable here’, ‘I’ve heard that sort of story before!’, but the pain was so intense he had to stop. 
He marvelled that acts which he had always judged so superficially, so gaily, had now become as serious as a moral illness. 
He certainly knew some women he could have asked to keep an eye on Odette. 
But how could he hope they would adopt the same point of view he now had and not hold on to the point of view he had had for so long, that had always guided him in love affairs, would not say to him, laughing: ‘You nasty jealous man – trying to rob others of a little pleasure’? 
By what trap-door, suddenly lowered, had he (who in the past had derived only refined pleasures from his love for Odette) been roughly dropped into this new circle of hell from which he could not see how he would ever get out? 
Poor Odette! 
He did not hold it against her. 
She was only half guilty. 
Didn’t people say it was her own mother who had handed her over to a rich Englishman in Nice when she was hardly more than a child? 
But what painful truth was now contained for him in those lines from Journal d’un Poète by Alfred de Vigny109 which he had read with indifference in the past: ‘When you feel you are falling in love with a woman, you ought to say to yourself: Who are her friends? What sort of life has she had? All one’s future happiness depends upon it.’ Swann was surprised that simple statements spelled out by his mind, like ‘I’ve heard that sort of story before!’, ‘I could see very well what she was after’ could hurt him so. 
But he realized that what he believed to be simple statements were merely parts of the framework that still contained, and could give back to him, the pain he had felt during Odette’s story. 
For it was indeed the same pain which he was feeling again. 
For all that he now knew – for all that he had even, as time passed, forgotten a little, forgiven – the moment he said these words to himself again, the old suffering made him once again what he had been before Odette spoke: ignorant, trustful; his cruel jealousy placed him once again, so that he might be wounded by Odette’s confession, in the position of a man who does not yet know, and after several months this old story still upset him like a revelation. 
He admired the terrible recreative power of his memory. 
It was only by the weakening of that generative force, whose fecundity diminishes with age, that he could hope for an easing of his torment. 
But as soon as the power of any one of Odette’s remarks to make him suffer seemed nearly exhausted, then one of those on which Swann’s mind had dwelt less until then, a remark that was almost new, would come to relieve the others and strike at him with undiminished vigour. 
The memory of the evening when he had dined with the Princesse des Laumes was painful to him, but it was only the core of his disease. 
The latter spread confusedly on all sides through the days before and after it. 
And whatever point in it he tried to touch in his memories, it was the whole of that season, during which the Verdurins had dined so often on the island in the Bois, that hurt him. 
Hurt him so badly that gradually the curiosity which his jealousy kept provoking in him was neutralized by his fear of the new torments he would inflict on himself by satisfying it. 
He realized that the entire period of Odette’s life that had elapsed before she met him, a period he had never tried to picture, was not the abstract expanse which he could vaguely see, but had consisted of specific years, each filled with concrete incidents. 
But if he came to know them, he was afraid that that past of hers, colourless, fluid and tolerable, might assume a body that was tangible and loathsome, a face that was individual and diabolical. 
And he continued to refrain from trying to imagine it, no longer from laziness of mind, but from fear of suffering. 
He hoped that one day he might at last be able to hear the name of the island in the Bois, of the Princesse des Laumes, without feeling the old tearing at his heart, and thought it would be imprudent to provoke Odette into supplying him with new remarks, names of places, different circumstances which, when his illness was still scarcely abated, would reawaken it again in another form.
What was more her very admissions, when she made them to him, of faults that she supposed he had discovered, rather served Swann as points of departure towards new doubts than put an end to the old. 
For they were never exactly proportional to the latter. 
Though Odette might subtract from her confession all the essential part, there remained in the accessory part something Swann had never imagined, that crushed him with its newness and would enable him to change the terms of the problem of his jealousy. 
And these admissions he could no longer forget. 
His soul bore them along, cast them aside, cradled them, like dead bodies. 
And it was poisoned by them.
On certain evenings she would suddenly be full of kindness towards him again, and she would warn him severely that he ought to take advantage of it right away, under penalty of not seeing it repeated for years to come; they had to go back to her house immediately to ‘make cattleya’, and this desire which she claimed to feel for him was so sudden, so inexplicable, so imperious, the caresses she lavished on him at these times so demonstrative and so unusual that this brutal and improbable fondness made Swann as unhappy as a lie or an unkindness. 
One evening when he had once again gone home with her in obedience to her command, and she was kissing him and murmuring to him with a passion quite unlike her usual coldness, he suddenly thought he heard a noise; he stood up, looked everywhere, found no one, but did not have the courage to go back to his place next to her, whereupon she, in a paroxysm of rage, broke a vase and said to Swann: ‘One can never do anything right with you!’ And he remained uncertain whether she had not hidden someone there with the desire of provoking the man’s jealousy or inflaming his senses.
Because the painter had been ill, Doctor Cottard had advised him to go to sea for a while; several of the regulars talked about going along with him; the Verdurins could not reconcile themselves to being left alone, rented a yacht, then became the purchasers of it and so Odette went on frequent cruises. 
Each time she had been gone for a little while, Swann felt he was beginning to separate from her, but as if this mental distance were proportional to the physical distance, as soon as he knew Odette was back, he could not rest without seeing her. 
Once, having gone off for only a month, as they thought, either because they were tempted along the way, or because M. Verdurin had cunningly arranged things beforehand to please his wife and had informed the regulars only as they proceeded, from Algiers they went to Tunis, then to Italy, then to Greece, to Constantinople, to Asia Minor. 
The voyage had lasted close to a year. 
Swann felt absolutely calm, almost happy. 
Even though Mme Verdurin had tried to persuade the pianist and Doctor Cottard that the aunt of the one and the patients of the other did not need them at all and that in any case it was imprudent to let Mme Cottard return to Paris, which M. Verdurin assured them was in the midst of a revolution, she was obliged to give them back their freedom at Constantinople. 
And the painter left with them. 
One day, shortly after the three travellers111 returned, Swann, seeing an omnibus go by heading for the Luxembourg, where he had business, had jumped inside and found himself sitting across from Mme Cottard, who was making the rounds of the people whose ‘day’ it was in full dress uniform, ostrich feather in hat, silk dress, muff, combination umbrella-sunshade, calling-card case and freshly cleaned white gloves. 
Clothed in these insignia, when it was dry out she would go on foot from one house to the next in the same neighbourhood, but for proceeding into a different neighbourhood would use the omnibus with connection service. 
During the first few minutes, before the woman’s native kindness perforated the starch of the petty bourgeoise, and also not very sure if she ought to talk about the Verdurins to Swann, she produced quite naturally, in her awkward, slow, soft voice which at times the omnibus drowned out completely with its rattling, remarks chosen from among those she heard and repeated in the twenty-five houses whose storeys she climbed during one day:
– I don’t need to ask you, Monsieur, if a man in-the-swim such as yourself has gone to the Mirlitons,112 to see the portrait by Machard113 which the whole of Paris is rushing to see? 
Well, and what do you think of it? 
Whose camp are you in, those who approve or those who don’t? 
It’s the same in every house now, all they talk about is the portrait by Machard; you aren’t fashionable, you aren’t really cultured, you aren’t up-to-date, unless you can give your opinion of Machard’s portrait.
Swann answered that he had not see the portrait, and Mme Cottard was afraid she had offended him by obliging him to confess it.
Having made these remarks, which were inspired by the loftiness of her plume, the monogram on her card case, the little number inked inside her gloves by the dry cleaner and the difficulty of talking to Swann about the Verdurins, Mme Cottard, seeing that they were still far away from the corner of the rue Bonaparte where the driver was to let her off, listened to her heart, which counselled other words.
– Your ears must have been burning, Monsieur, she said, during the voyage we made with Mme Verdurin. 
We talked of nothing else but you.
Swann was very surprised, he assumed his name was never mentioned in the presence of the Verdurins.
– Anyway, added Mme Cottard, Mme de Crécy was there, and that says it all. 
Wherever Odette is, she can never go for very long without mentioning you. 
And as you may expect she does not speak ill of you. 
What! 
You doubt it? 
she said, seeing Swann make a gesture of scepticism.
And carried away by the sincerity of her conviction, and imputing no unfavourable meaning to the word, which she used only in the sense in which one employs it to speak of the affection between friends:
And Mme Cottard withdrew from her muff and held out to Swann a hand gloved in white from which escaped, along with a transfer ticket, a vision of upper-class life that filled the omnibus, mingling with the smell of the dry cleaner. 
And Swann felt himself overflowing with affection for her, as much as for Mme Verdurin (and almost as much as for Odette, since the feeling he now had for the latter, being no longer mingled with pain, was hardly love any more), while from the platform of the omnibus he followed her with his newly affectionate eyes as she courageously made her way up the rue Bonaparte, her plume high, her skirt lifted in one hand, holding in the other her sunshade and her card case with its monogram displayed, while her muff danced in front of her.
To compete with the morbid feelings that Swann had for Odette, Mme Cottard, a better healer than her husband would have been, had grafted alongside them other feelings, normal ones, of gratitude, friendship, feelings which in Swann’s mind would make Odette more human (more like other women, because other women too could inspire these feelings in him), would hasten her final transformation into the Odette who was loved with a peaceful affection, who had brought him back one evening after a party at the painter’s home to drink a glass of orangeade with Forcheville and with whom Swann had glimpsed the possibility of living in happiness.
Having in the past often thought with terror that one day he would cease to be in love with Odette, he had promised himself to be vigilant and, as soon as he felt his love was beginning to leave him, to cling to it, to keep hold of it. 
But now, corresponding to the weakening of his love there was a simultaneous weakening of his desire to remain in love. 
For one cannot change, that is to say become another person, while continuing to acquiesce to the feelings of the person one no longer is. 
Now and then a name glimpsed in a newspaper, that of one of the men he thought could have been Odette’s lovers, restored his jealousy to him. 
But it was very mild and as it proved to him that he had not yet completely emerged from the time when he had suffered so much – but also when he had experienced such voluptuous sorts of feelings – and that the hazards of the road ahead might still permit him to catch a furtive, distant glimpse of its beauties, this jealousy actually gave him a pleasant thrill just as to the sad Parisian leaving Venice to return to France a last mosquito proves that Italy and the summer are not yet too remote. 
But most often, when he made the effort, if not to remain in this quite distinctive period of his life from which he was emerging, at least to have a clear view of it while he still could, he would notice that already he no longer could; he would have liked to observe as though it were a landscape about to disappear that love which he had just left behind; but it is so difficult to duplicate oneself and give oneself a truthful display of a feeling one no longer has that soon, darkness gathering in his brain, he could no longer see anything, gave up looking, took off his lorgnon, wiped its lenses; and he said to himself that it would be better to rest a little, that there would still be time later on, and would settle back with the incuriosity, the torpor of the drowsy traveller who pulls his hat down over his eyes in order to sleep in the railway carriage which he feels carrying him faster and faster, away from the country where he has lived for so long and which he had promised himself not to let slip past without giving it a last farewell. 
Indeed, like the same traveller if he does not wake until he is back in France, when Swann happened upon proof close at hand that Forcheville had been Odette’s lover, he noticed that he felt no pain, that his love was far away by now, and he was sorry not to have been warned of the moment when he was about to leave it behind for ever. 
And just as before kissing Odette for the first time he had tried to imprint on his memory the face which had been familiar to him for so long and which was about to be transformed by the memory of that kiss, so he would have wanted, in his thoughts at least, to have been able to make his farewells, while she still existed, to the Odette who had inspired him with love, jealousy, to the Odette who had made him suffer and whom he would now never see again. 
He was mistaken. 
He did see see her again, one more time, a few weeks later. 
It was while he was asleep, in the twilight of a dream. 
He was walking with Mme Verdurin, Doctor Cottard, a young man in a fez whom he could not identify, the painter, Odette, Napoleon III and my grandfather, along a path that followed the sea and overhung it steeply sometimes very high up, sometimes by a few metres only, so that one climbed and descended again constantly; those who were descending again were already no longer visible to those who were still climbing, what little daylight remained was failing and it seemed as though darkest night was about to descend on them at any moment. 
Now and again the waves leaped right up to the edge and Swann felt sprays of icy water on his cheek. 
Odette told him to wipe them off, he could not and was embarrassed by this in front of her, as he was embarrassed to be in his nightshirt. 
He hoped that in the darkness no one would realize, but Mme Verdurin stared at him with a look of surprise for a long moment during which he saw her face change shape, her nose lengthen, and that she had a large moustache. 
He turned away to look at Odette, her cheeks were pale, with little red spots, her features drawn, ringed with shadows, but she was looking at him with eyes full of tenderness that were about to separate from her like teardrops and fall on him, and he felt he loved her so much that he wanted to take her away at once. 
Suddenly Odette turned her wrist, looked at a little watch and said: ‘I have to go,’ she said good-bye to everyone, in the same manner, without taking Swann aside, without telling him where she would see him again that evening or another day. 
He did not dare ask her, he would have liked to follow her and was obliged, without turning back towards her, to answer with a smile some question of Mme Verdurin’s, but his heart was pounding horribly, he felt he hated Odette, he would have liked to cut out those eyes of hers that he had loved so much just a moment ago, crush those pallid cheeks. 
He continued to climb with Mme Verdurin, which meant that with each step he moved farther away from Odette, who was descending in the opposite direction. 
After one second, it was many hours ago that she had left them. 
The painter remarked to Swann that Napoleon III had vanished an instant after she had. 
‘They certainly must have arranged it together, he added. They must have met at the bottom of the hill, but they didn’t want to say good-bye at the same time for the sake of appearances. She’s obviously his mistress.’ The unknown young man began to cry. 
Swann tried to comfort him. 
‘Really, she’s doing the right thing, he told him, drying his eyes and taking off his fez so that he would be more comfortable. I told her a dozen times she should do it. Why be sad about it? He above all would understand her.’ Thus did Swann talk to himself, for the young man he had not been able to identify at first was also himself; like certain novelists, he had divided his personality between two characters, the one having the dream, and another he saw before him wearing a fez.
As for Napoleon III, it was to Forcheville that some vague association of ideas, then a certain modification in the Baron’s usual physiognomy, lastly the broad ribbon of the Legion of Honour on his chest, had induced him to give this name; but in reality, and in everything which the character in the dream represented to him and recalled to him, it was indeed Forcheville. 
For, from incomplete and changing images the sleeping Swann drew false deductions, having for the moment as well such creative power that he reproduced himself by simple division like certain lower organisms; with the warmth that he felt in his own palm he modelled the hollow of a strange hand which he thought he was clasping, and from feelings and impressions of which he was not yet conscious, devised peripeteias of a sort which, through their logical linking, would produce at just the right moment in Swann’s sleep the person required to receive his love or prompt his awakening. 
In an instant utter darkness descended on him, an alarm sounded, inhabitants passed by running, escaping from houses in flames; Swann heard the sound of the waves leaping and his heart, with the same violence, pounding with anxiety in his chest. 
Suddenly the palpitations of his heart redoubled in speed, he felt an inexplicable pain and nausea; a countryman covered with burns flung at him as he passed: ‘Come and ask Charlus where Odette ended up this evening with her friend, he used to go about with her in the old days and she tells him everything. It’s them that started the fire.’ It was his valet who had come to wake him and who said:
– Monsieur, it’s eight o’clock and the hairdresser is here, I’ve told him to come by again in an hour.
But these words, penetrating the swells of sleep in which Swann was plunged, had reached his consciousness only by suffering that deflection which causes a ray of light in the depths of water to appear to be a sun, just as a moment earlier the sound of the doorbell, assuming in the depths of those abysses the sonority of an alarm, had begotten the episode of the fire. 
Meanwhile the scene before his eyes turned to dust, he opened his eyes, heard one last time the sound of a wave of the sea as it receded. 
He touched his cheek. 
It was dry. 
And yet he could recall the sensation of the cold water and the taste of the salt. 
He got up, dressed. 
He had asked the hairdresser to come early because he had written to my grandfather the night before that he would be going to Combray in the afternoon, having learned that Mme de Cambremer – Mlle Legrandin – was spending a few days there. 
Associating in his memory the charm of that young face with the charm of a countryside he had not visited in such a long time, he found that together they offered him an attraction that had made him decide to leave Paris for a few days at last. 
Because the different chance events which bring us into contact with certain people do not coincide with the time during which we are in love with them, but, extending beyond it, may occur before it begins and repeat themselves after it has ended, the earliest appearances in our lives of a person destined later to captivate us assume retrospectively in our eyes the significance of a warning, a presage. 
This was how Swann had often looked back at the image of Odette when he met her at the theatre, that first evening when he did not dream he would ever see her again – and how he now recalled the party at Mme de Saint-Euverte’s where he had introduced Général de Froberville to Mme de Cambremer. 
We have such numerous interests in our lives that it is not uncommon, on a single occasion, for the foundations of a happiness that does not yet exist to be laid down alongside the intensification of a grief from which we are still suffering. 
And undoubtedly this could have happened to Swann elsewhere than at Mme de Saint-Euverte’s. 
Who knows, even, had he found himself elsewhere, that evening, if other happinesses, other griefs would not have come to him, which afterwards would have appeared to him to have been inevitable? 
But what did seem to him to have been inevitable was what had taken place, and he was not far short of seeing something providential in the fact that he had decided to go to Mme de Saint-Euverte’s party, because his mind, wanting to admire life’s richness of invention and incapable of posing itself a difficult question for very long, such as the question of what was most to be wished for, believed that in the sufferings he had experienced that evening and in the pleasures still unsuspected that were already germinating – between which the balance was too difficult to establish – there was a sort of necessary connection.
But while, an hour after he had woken, he was giving instructions to the hairdresser to see that his haircut would not become tousled on the train, he thought about his dream again, and saw once again, as he had felt them close beside him, Odette’s pale complexion, her too thin cheeks, her drawn features, her tired eyes, everything which – in the course of the successive expressions of tenderness which had made of his abiding love for Odette a long oblivion of the first image he had formed of her – he had ceased to notice since the earliest days of their acquaintance, days to which no doubt, while he slept, his memory had returned to search for their exact sensation. 
And with the intermittent coarseness that reappeared in him as soon as he was no longer unhappy and the level of his morality dropped accordingly, he exclaimed to himself: ‘To think that I wasted years of my life, that I wanted to die, that I felt my deepest love, for a woman who did not appeal to me, who was not my type!’
Among the bedrooms whose images I summoned up most often in my nights of insomnia, none resembled less the rooms at Combray, dusted with an atmosphere that was grainy, pollinated, edible and devout, than the room at the Grand-Hôtel de la Plage, at Balbec, whose enamel-painted walls contained, like the polished sides of a swimming-pool which tints the water blue, a pure azure salt sea air. 
The Bavarian decorator who had been commissioned to furnish the hotel had varied the design schemes of the rooms and on three sides, along the walls, in the one I was occupying, had placed low bookcases, with glass panes, in which, depending on the spot they occupied, and by an effect he had not foreseen, one or another part of the changing picture of the sea was reflected, unfurling a frieze of bright seascapes, which was interrupted only by the solid pieces of mahogany. 
So much so that the whole room had the look of one of those model dormitories presented in ‘modern style’1 furniture shows, where they are hung with works of art assumed to be likely to delight the eyes of the person who will be sleeping there, and representing subjects in keeping with the type of site where the room will be found.
‘You can still feel there beneath your feet, he said, far more so than at Finistère itself3 (and even though hotels are being superimposed upon it now without, however, the power to change the more ancient skeleton of the land), you can still feel the true end of the land of France, of Europe, of the Ancient World. 
And it’s the last encampment of fishermen, precisely like all the fishermen who have ever lived since the beginning of the world, facing the eternal realm of the mists of the sea and shadows of the night.
’
If my health improved and my parents allowed me, if not to go to stay in Balbec, at least to take just once, in order to acquaint myself with the architecture and landscapes of Normandy or Brittany, that one-twenty-two train which I had boarded so many times in my imagination, I would have wished by preference to stop in the most beautiful towns; but compare them as I might, how could I choose, any more than between individual people, who are not interchangeable, between Bayeux, so lofty in its noble red-tinged lace, its summit illuminated by the old gold of its last syllable; Vitré, whose acute accent barred its ancient glass with black wood lozenges;8 gentle Lamballe, whose whiteness goes from eggshell yellow to pearl grey; Coutances, a Norman cathedral, which its final, fat, yellowing diphthong crowns with a tower of butter; Lannion with the sound, in its village silence, of the coach followed by the fly;9 Questambert, Pontorson, naïve and ridiculous, white feathers and yellow beaks scattered along the road to those poetic river spots; Benodet, a name scarcely moored, which the river seems to want to carry away among its algae; Pont-Aven, a pink-and-white flight of the wing of a lightly poised coif reflected trembling in the greeny waters of a canal; Quimperlé, more firmly attached, ever since the Middle Ages, among the streams about which it babbles as they bead it with a pearly grisaille like that which is sketched, through the spiderwebs of a stained-glass window, by rays of sunlight which have turned into blunted points of burnished silver?
And also, alas, he forbade them absolutely to allow me to go to the theatre to hear La Berma; the sublime artist, whom Bergotte had regarded as a genius, would have, by introducing me to something that was perhaps as important and as beautiful, consoled me for not having been to Florence and Venice, for not going to Balbec. 
They had to confine themselves to sending me to the Champs-Élysées every day under the supervision of a person who would keep me from tiring myself, and that was Françoise, who had entered our service after the death of my Aunt Léonie. 
To go to the Champs-Élysées was unbearable to me. 
If only Bergotte had described it in one of his books, I probably would have wanted to get to know it, like all the things whose ‘double’ someone had begun by putting into my imagination. 
It warmed them, made them live, gave them a personality, and I wanted to find them again in reality; but in this public garden nothing was attached to my dreams.
Instantaneous ivy, fleeting wall flora! 
– the least colourful, the saddest, in the opinion of many, of those that clamber over the wall or decorate the casement; for me, the dearest of them all since the day it appeared on our balcony, like the very shadow of the presence of Gilberte, who was perhaps already in the Champs-Élysées and, as soon as I arrived there, would say to me: ‘Let’s start playing prisoners’ base right away, you’re on my side’; fragile, carried off by a breath, but also in harmony, not with the season, but with the hour; promise of an immediate happiness which the day will deny or fulfil, and thereby of the paramount immediate happiness, the happiness of love; softer, warmer on the stone even than moss; hardy, for it needs only a ray of light to come into being and blossom into joy, even in the heart of winter.
And even on those days when all other vegetation has disappeared, when the handsome green leather that wraps the trunks of the old trees is hidden under snow, when the snow had stopped falling, but the weather was still too overcast to hope that Gilberte would go out, then suddenly, making my mother say: ‘Well now, it’s actually nice out, perhaps you might try going to the Champs-Élysées after all,’ on the mantle of snow that covered the balcony the sun that had appeared would weave gold threads together and embroider black glimmers. 
That day we would find no one or one solitary girl about to leave, who would assure me that Gilberte was not coming. 
The chairs, deserted by the imposing but chilly assembly of governesses, were empty. 
Alone, near the lawn, sat a lady of a certain age who came in all weathers, always decked out in the same clothing, magnificent and dark, to make whose acquaintance I would at that time have sacrificed, had the exchange been allowed me, all the greatest future advantages of my life. 
For Gilberte went up to greet her every day; she asked Gilberte for news of ‘her love of a mother’; and it seemed to me that, had I known her, I would have been someone quite different for Gilberte, someone who knew her parents’ friends. 
While her grandchildren played farther off, she always read Les Débats,16 which she called ‘my old Débats’, and with an aristocratic affectation would say, when speaking of the policeman or the woman who rented the chairs:17 ‘My old friend the policeman’, ‘the chair-warden and I who are old friends’.
The first of these days – to which the snow, the image of the powers that could stop me from seeing Gilberte, imparted the sadness of a day of separation and even the aspect of a day of departure because it changed the face and almost prevented the use of the customary site of our only encounters, now changed, all wrapped in covers – this day, however, caused my love to progress, for it was like a first sorrow that she had shared with me. 
There were only the two of us out of all our gang, and to be thus the only one there with her was not only like a beginning of intimacy, but also on her part – as though she had come out only for me, in such weather – it seemed to me as touching as if on one of those days when she was invited to a party she had given it up to come to find me in the Champs-Élysées; I gained more confidence in the vitality and the future of our friendship, which remained hardy in the midst of the numbness, loneliness and ruin of the things around us; and while she put snowballs down my neck, I smiled with emotion at what seemed to me both a preference she was showing me by tolerating me as her travelling companion in this new and wintry land, and also a sort of loyalty she was cherishing for me in the midst of misfortune. 
Soon one after the other, like hesitant sparrows, her friends arrived all black against the snow. 
We began to play, and since this day so sadly begun was to end in joy, when I went up, before playing prisoners’ base, to the friend with the sharp voice whom I had heard the first day shouting the name Gilberte, she said to me: ‘No, no, we know perfectly well you’d rather be on Gilberte’s side, besides look, she’s signalling to you.’ She was indeed calling me to come to join her camp on the snowy lawn, which the sun, giving it glimmers of pink, the metallic worn surface of an old brocade, was turning into a Field of the Cloth of Gold.18
That day which I had so dreaded was, in fact, one of the only ones on which I was not too unhappy.
Another time, still preoccupied by the desire to hear La Berma in a classical play, I had asked her if she happened to own a little book in which Bergotte talked about Racine, and which one could no longer find. 
She had asked me to remind her of its exact title and that evening I had addressed an express letter to her, writing on the envelope that name, Gilberte Swann, which I had so often copied out in my notebooks. 
The next day she brought me a packet tied up in mauve ribbons and sealed with white wax, containing the little book, a copy of which she had asked someone to locate for her. 
‘You see? It really is the one you asked for,’ she said, taking from her muff the letter I had sent her. 
But on the address of this pneumatique20 – which, only yesterday, was nothing, was merely a petit bleu which I had written, and which, now that a telegraph boy had delivered it to Gilberte’s concierge and a servant had carried it to her room, had become this priceless thing, one of the petits bleus she had received that day – it was hard for me to recognize the insignificant, solitary lines of my handwriting under the printed circles apposed to it by the post office, under the inscriptions added in pencil by one of the telegraph messengers, signs of actual realization, stamps from the outside world, violet bands symbolizing life, which for the first time came to espouse, sustain, uplift, delight my dream.
And there was also one day when she said to me: ‘You know, you can call me Gilberte, anyway I’ll call you by your first name. It’s too tiresome otherwise.’ Yet for a while she went on simply calling me vous21 and when I pointed this out to her, she smiled, and composing, constructing a sentence like the ones in grammar books of foreign languages whose only object is to make us use a new word, she ended it with my given name. 
And remembering later what I had felt then, I could distinguish within it the impression of having been held for a moment in her mouth, myself, naked, without any of the social terms and conditions that also belonged, either to her other friends, or, when she said my family name, to my parents, and of which her lips – in the effort she made, rather like her father, to articulate the words she wanted to emphasize – seemed to strip me, undress me, as one removes the skin from a fruit of which only the pulp can be eaten, while her gaze, adopting the same new degree of intimacy as her words, reached me more directly also, while at the same time showing its awareness of this, its pleasure and even its gratitude, by accompanying itself with a smile.
On one of those sunny days that had not fulfilled my hopes, I did not have the courage to hide my disappointment from Gilberte.
– I had so many things to ask you, I said to her. 
I thought that today was going to mean so much in our friendship. 
And as soon as you get here, you have to leave again! 
Try to come early tomorrow, so that I can finally talk to you.
Her face shone and she was jumping with joy as she answered me:
– Tomorrow, you may depend upon it, my fine friend, I won’t be coming at all! 
I’ve got a big tea-party; nor the day after tomorrow, either, I’m going to a friend’s house to watch the arrival of King Theodosius26 from her windows, it will be splendid, and then the day after we’re going to Michel Strogoff27 and then after that, Christmas will be coming soon and the New Year’s holidays. 
Maybe they’ll take me to the Midi.28 
How nice that would be! 
– though it will mean I won’t have a Christmas tree; anyway, if I stay in Paris, I won’t be coming here because I’ll be paying calls with Mama. 
Good-bye, there’s Papa calling me.
I returned home with Françoise through streets that were still bedecked with sunlight, as on the evening of a holiday that is over. 
I could scarcely drag my legs along.
– I’m not a bit surprised, said Françoise. 
It’s not the weather for this time of year, it’s far too hot. 
Alas! 
My Lord, imagine all the other poor people out there who must be feeling sick today. 
Anyone would think things were topsy-turvy up in heaven, too!
I repeated to myself, stifling my sobs, the words in which Gilberte had exploded with joy at the prospect of not coming back to the Champs-Élysées for such a long time. 
But already the charm with which, by the mere act of thinking, my mind was filled as soon as I thought about her, and the special, unique position – painful though it was – in which I was inevitably placed in relation to Gilberte by the internal constraint of a mental habit had begun to add, even to this sign of indifference, something romantic, and in the midst of my tears a smile formed that was simply the timid adumbration of a kiss. 
And when it was time for the post to come, I said to myself that evening as on every evening: ‘I’m going to get a letter from Gilberte, she’s going to tell me at last that she has always loved me, and explain the mysterious reason why she has been forced to hide it from me until now, to pretend she could be happy without seeing me, the reason why she has disguised herself as the other Gilberte who is merely a playmate.’
It showed me, finally, the new order designed by the invisible seamstress, that if we may wish that the actions of a person who has hurt us until now were not sincere, there follows in their wake a clarity against which our wishes are powerless and to which, rather than to them, we must address ourselves in asking what that person’s actions will be tomorrow.
These new words were heard by my love; they persuaded it that the next day would not be different from what all the other days had been; that Gilberte’s feeling for me, already too old to be able to change, was indifference; that in my friendship with Gilberte, I was the only one who loved. 
‘It’s true, my love answered, there’s nothing more to be done with this friendship, it won’t change.’ And so, the very next day (or waiting for a public holiday if there was one coming up soon, or an anniversary, or the New Year perhaps, one of those days which are not like the others, when time makes a fresh start by rejecting the heritage of the past, by not accepting the legacy of its sorrows) I would ask Gilberte to give up our old friendship and lay the foundations of a new one.
I always had within reach of my hand a map of Paris which, because one could distinguish on it the street where M. and Mme Swann lived, seemed to me to contain a treasure. 
And for pleasure, from a sort of chivalrous loyalty also, apropos of anything or nothing, I would say the name of that street, until my father asked, not being fully informed about my love as were my mother and my grandmother:
– Now why do you talk about that street all the time, there’s nothing extraordinary about it, it’s a very pleasant street to live on because it’s two steps from the Bois, but there are ten others of which the same thing is true.
– Oh, now I know who she is! exclaimed my mother while I felt myself blushing from shame. 
On guard! 
On guard! as your poor grandfather would have said. 
So she’s the one you find so beautiful! 
Why, she’s horrible and always has been. 
She’s the widow of a bailiff. 
You don’t remember when you were little the lengths I went to to avoid her at the gymnastics class where, though she didn’t know me, she would come and try to talk to me with the excuse of wanting to tell me you were “too beautiful for a boy”. 
She always had a mania for getting to know people and she must indeed be rather mad as I always thought, if she really knows Mme Swann. 
For though her background is quite common, at least there was never anything said against her so far as I know. 
But she always had to cultivate a new acquaintance. 
She’s horrible, frightfully vulgar, and a trouble-maker into the bargain.
’
– Why, naturally, answered my mother, who always seemed to be afraid that, were she to admit there was any coldness between them and Swann, people would have tried to bring about a reconciliation closer than she wished, because of Mme Swann, whom she did not want to know. 
It was he who came up and spoke to me, I didn’t see him.
– Quarrelled? 
Now what makes you think we might have quarrelled? 
she answered briskly, as if I had attacked the fiction of her good relations with Swann and tried to effect a ‘rapprochement’.
– He might be cross with you for not inviting him any more.
– One isn’t obliged to invite everyone; does he invite me? 
I don’t know his wife.
– Well, yes! 
He came at Combray, and now in Paris he has other things to do and so have I. But I promise you we didn’t look in the least like two people who had quarrelled. 
We stood there together for a moment because they hadn’t brought him his parcel. 
He asked after you, he told me you played with his daughter, added my mother, stunning me with the prodigious fact that I existed in Swann’s mind, even more, that I existed there in so complete a manner, that, when I trembled with love there before him in the Champs-Élysées, he knew my name, who my mother was, and could amalgamate around my qualification as playmate of his daughter certain facts about my grandparents, their family, the place where we lived, certain details of our past life which were perhaps unknown even to me. 
But my mother did not seem to have seen any particular charm in that counter at Trois Quartiers where she had represented for Swann, at the moment when he caught sight of her, a definite person with whom he had memories in common that had inspired the impulse to approach her, the gesture of greeting her.
Nor did she or my father either seem to find, in talking about Swann’s grandparents, about the title of honorary stockbroker, a pleasure that surpassed all others. 
My imagination had singled out and sanctified one particular family within the social Paris, just as it had singled out from the Paris of stone one particular house whose carriage entrance it had sculpted and whose windows it had made precious. 
But I was the only one who could see these ornaments. 
In the same way that my father and mother regarded the house that Swann lived in as similar to the other houses built at the same time in the neighbourhood of the Bois, so Swann’s family seemed to them of the same sort as many other families of stockbrokers. 
They judged it more favourably or less depending on the degree to which it shared in merits common to the rest of the universe and did not see in it anything unique. 
On the contrary, what they appreciated in it they encountered to an equal, or higher, degree elsewhere. 
And so, after having agreed that the house was well situated, they would talk about another that was better situated, but that had nothing to do with Gilberte, or about financiers a cut above her grandfather; and if they had seemed for a moment to be of the same opinion as me, it was because of a misunderstanding that would soon be dispelled. 
For, in order to perceive in everything that surrounded Gilberte an unknown quality analogous in the world of emotions to what infra-red may be in the world of colours, my parents would have needed that supplementary and ephemeral sense with which love had endowed me.
Even those who did not know her were alerted by something singular and excessive – or perhaps by a telepathic radiation like those that triggered bursts of applause from the ignorant crowd at moments when La Berma was sublime – that this must be some well-known person. 
They would ask one another: ‘Who is she?’, or sometimes question a passing stranger, or promise themselves they would remember the way she was dressed as a reference for some better-informed friend who would immediately enlighten them. 
Others, half stopping in their walk, would say:
– Do you know who that is? 
Mme Swann! 
That means nothing to you? 
Odette de Crécy?
– Odette de Crécy? 
Why in fact I was just wondering… Those sad eyes… But you know she can’t be as young as she once was! 
I remember I slept with her the day MacMahon resigned.
– You’d better not remind her of it. 
She’s now Mme Swann, wife of a gentleman in the Jockey Club who’s a friend of the Prince of Wales. 
But she’s still superb.
– Yes, but if only you’d known her then – how pretty she was! 
She lived in a very strange little house filled with Chinese bric-à-brac. 
I remember we were bothered by the newsboys shouting outside, in the end she made me get up.
